



## The GM
Changing the GM’s side of the rules is an entirely different beast from writing custom player moves. Writing GM moves is the easy part. Since a GM move is just a statement of something that fictionally happens, feel free to write new ones as you please. Most of the time you’ll find they’re just specific cases of one of the moves already established, but occasionally you’ll come across something new. Just keep in mind the spectrum of hard to soft moves, your principles, and your agenda, and you’ll be fine.

Changing the GM’s agenda or principles is one of the biggest changes you can make to the game. Changing these areas will likely require changes throughout the rest of the game, plus playtesting to nail it all down.

**Play to find out what happens** is the least changeable part of the GM’s agenda. Other options, like “play towards your set plot” or “play to challenge the players’ skills” will be resisted pretty strongly by the other rules. The moves give the players abilities that can change the course of an planned adventure quite quickly; if you’re not playing to find out what happens you’ll have to resist the moves at every step or rewrite many of them.

**Fill the characters’ lives with adventure** could be rephrased, but it’s hard to really change. “Fill the characters’ lives with intrigue” might work, but intrigue just seems like a type of adventure. Removing this agenda entirely will require major reworking since the move structure is based on this. The effects of a miss and the GM’s soft moves are all there to create a life of adventure.

**Portraying a fantastic world** is maybe the easiest to change but it still requires considerable rewriting of the class moves. A historical world, a grim world, or a utopian world are all possible, but you’ll need to carefully rethink many moves. A historical world will require magic, equipment, and several other sections to be nearly entirely rewritten or removed. A grim world can only survive if the players’ moves come with darker costs. A utopian world won’t need many of the moves as written. Still, this is the easiest part of the agenda to change, since it requires changing the moves, not the basic structures of the game.

The GM’s principles are more mutable than the agenda but still can seriously change the game with only minor modifications. **Address the characters, not the players; Make your move, but misdirect; Never speak the name of your move; Begin and end with the fiction;** and **Be a fan of the characters** are the most important principles. Without these the conversation of play and the use of moves is likely to break down.

**Embrace the fantastic; Give every monster life; Name every person; Think Dangerous;** and **Give them something to work towards** are key to the spirit of Dungeon World and fantasy exploration. These are changeable, but they amount to changing the setting of the game. If you want to change any of these, you may have to make changes to all of them.

**Leave Blanks; Sometimes, let them decide;** and **Ask questions and use the answers** are important to running Dungeon World well. They also apply to many other games in the same style. The game will be diminished without them, but the conversation of play will continue. These are also some of the most portable principles, applicable to many other games. They may even work in games with very different play styles.

An additional principle that some people prefer to add is **Test their bonds**. This principle is entirely compatible with the others and with all the moves, but it changes the focus of the game somewhat. Fronts need to be rethought to work fully with this, and you might need to add moves that speak to it.

## Monsters
The easiest place to modify monsters is in the questions used to create them. The simplest changes have to do with adjusting lethality or randomness to your liking.

The easiest place to modify monsters is in the questions used to create them. The simplest changes have to do with adjusting lethality or randomness to your liking.

A more interesting change is to change the questions being asked to present a different view of monsters. The views built into the questions imply that monsters are more or less like other creatures: they can be of many alignments and won’t always be opposed to the player characters. If you want to make Dungeon World about hunting down evil monsters and destroying them, you might rewrite some of the questions, maybe adding this:

#### The monster is Evil through and through. Choose one to reflect why it’s evil:
- It’s an intrusion of the Old Ones Beyond the Walls: Planar, +5 damage
- It’s a product of the Old Wizards of the Red Tower: Construct, +5 HP
- It’s from The Time Before Man: Primordial, +5 damage, +5 HP

When creating new monster questions you can either reinterpret existing monsters by answering the questions for them again or only use the new questions for new monsters. If the new questions you add or change are key to your vision of Dungeon World it’s best to redo all the monsters you use; if the question only applies to a specific kind of monster anyway you can just use it for new monsters.

# First Session
The first session of a game of Dungeon World begins with character creation. Character creation is also world creation, the details on the character sheets and the questions that you ask establish what Dungeon World is like -- who lives in it and what’s going on.

This section is for the GM so it’s addressed to you—the GM. For the players, the first session is just like every other. They just have to play their characters like real people and explore Dungeon World. You have to do a little more in the first session. You establish the world and the threats the players will face.

## Prep
Before the first session, you’ll need to print some stuff. Print off:
- A few copies of the basic moves
- One copy of each class sheet, double-sided
- One copy each of the cleric and wizard spell sheets, double-sided
- The GM sheet

You’ll also need to read this whole book, especially the sections on GMing (GM moves) and the basic moves. It’s a good idea to be acquainted with the class moves too, so you can be prepared for them. Be especially sure to read the rules for fronts, but don’t create any yet.

Think about fantastic worlds, strange magic, and foul beasts. Remember the games you played and the stories you told. Watch some movies, read some comics; get heroic fantasy into your brain.

What you bring to the first session, ideas-wise, is up to you. At the very least bring your head full of ideas. That’s the bare minimum.

If you like you can plan a little more. Maybe think of an evil plot and who’s behind it, or some monsters you’d like to use.

If you’ve got some spare time on your hands you can even draw some maps (but remember, from your principles: leave blanks) and imagine specific locations.

The one thing you absolutely can’t bring to the table is a planned storyline or plot. You don’t know the heroes or the world before you sit down to play so planning anything concrete is just going to frustrate you. It also conflicts with your agenda: play to find out what happens.

### Getting Started
When everyone shows up for the first session briefly introduce Dungeon World to anyone who hasn’t played before. Cover the mechanical basis of moves. Introduce the character classes, help players pick their classes, and walk them through character creation.

Your role during character creation is threefold: help everyone, ask questions, and take notes. When a player makes a choice—particularly for their bonds—ask them about it. Get more detail. Think about what these details mean.

You should also set expectations: the players are to play their characters as people—skilled adventurers delving into dangerous places, but real people. Your role is to play the rest of the world as a dynamic, changing place.

Some questions commonly come up during character creation. You should be ready to answer them:

_Are the characters friends?_ No, not necessarily, but they do work together as a team for common goals. Their reasons for pursuing those goals may be different, but they manage to work together.

_Are there other wizards?_ Not really. There are other workers of arcane magic, and the common folk may call them wizards, but they’re not like you. They don’t have the same abilities, though they may be similar. Later on there may be another player character with the same class but no GM character will ever really be a wizard (or any other class).

_What’s coin?_ Coin’s the currency of the realm. It’s good pretty much everywhere. It’ll buy you mundane stuff, like steel swords and wooden staves. The special stuff, like magic weapons, isn’t for sale. Not for coin, anyway…

_Is the GM trying to kill us?_ No. The GM’s job is to portray the world and the things in it and the world is a very dangerous place. You might die. That doesn’t mean the GM is out to get you.

During this entire process, especially character creation, ask questions. Look for interesting facts established by the characters’ bonds, moves, classes, and descriptions and ask about those things. Be curious! When someone mentions the demons that slaughtered their village find out more about them. After all, you don’t have anything (except maybe a dungeon) and everything they give you is fuel for future adventures.

Also pay attention to the players’ questions. When mechanical questions come up answer them. When questions of setting or fiction come up your best bet is to turn those questions around. When a player says, “Who is the King of Torsea,” say, “I don’t know. Who is it? What is he like?” Collaborate with your players. Asking a question means it’s something that interests them so work with them to make the answers interesting. Don’t be afraid to say, “I don’t know” and ask them the same questions. Work together to find a fantastic and interesting answer.

If you’ve come to the table with some ideas about stuff you’d like to see in the world, share them with the players. Their characters are their responsibility and the world is yours—you’ve got a lot of say in what lives in it. If you want the game to be about a hunt for the lost sorcerer-race of aeons past, say so! If the players aren’t interested or they’re sick to death of sorcerers, they’ll let you know and you can work together to find some other way. You don’t need pre-approval for everything but making sure everyone is excited about the broad strokes of the world is a great start.

Once everyone has their characters created you can take a deep breath. Look back over the questions you’ve asked and answered so far. You should have some notes that will point you towards what the game might look like. Look at what the players have brought to the table. Look to the ideas that’ve been stewing away in your head. It’s time for the adventure to begin!

### The First Adventure
The first adventure is really about discovering the direction that future sessions will take. Throughout the first adventure keep your eye out for unresolved threats; note dangerous things that are mentioned but not dealt with. These will be fuel for sessions to come.

Start the session with a group of player characters (maybe all of them) in a tense situation. Use anything that demands action: outside the entrance to a dungeon, ambushed in a fetid swamp, peeking through the crack in a door at the orc guards, or being sentenced before King Levus. Ask questions right away—“who is leading the ambush against you?” or “what did you do to make King Levus so mad?” If the situation stems directly from the characters and your questions, all the better.

Here’s where the game starts. The players will start saying and doing things, which means they’ll start making moves. For the first session you should watch especially carefully for when moves apply, until the players get the hang of it. Often, in the early sessions, the players will be most comfortable just narrating their actions—this is fine. When a move triggers let them know. Say, “It sounds like you’re trying to…” and then walk them through the move. Players looking for direction will look to their character sheet. When a player just says “I hack and slash him” be quick to ask, “so what are you actually doing?” Ask “How?” or “With what?”

For the first session, you have a few specific goals:
- Establish details, describe
- Use what they give you
- Ask questions
- Leave blanks
- Look for interesting facts
- Help the players understand the moves
- Give each character a chance to shine
- Introduce NPCs

#### Establish details, describe
All the ideas and visions in your head don’t really exist in the fiction of the game until you share them, describe them, and detail them. The first session is the time to establish the basics of what things look like, who’s in charge, what they wear, what the world is like, what the immediate location is like. Describe everything but keep it brief enough to expand on later. Use a detail or two to make a description really stand out as real.

#### Use what they give you
The best part of the first session is you don’t have to come with anything concrete. You might have a dungeon sketched out but the players provide the real meat—use it. They’ll emerge from the darkness of that first dungeon and when they do and their eyes adjust to the light, you’ll have built up an exciting world to explore with their help. Look at their bonds, their moves, how they answer your questions and use what you find to fill in the world around the characters.

#### Ask questions
You’re using what they give you, right? What if you need more? That’s when you draw it out by asking questions. Poke and prod about specific things. Ask for reactions: “What does Lux think about that?” “Is Avon doing something about it?”

If you ever find yourself at a loss, pause for a second and ask a question. Ask one character a question about another. When a character does something, ask how a different character feels or reacts. Questions will power your game and make it feel real and exciting. Use the answers you find to fill in what might happen next.

#### Leave blanks
This is one of your principles, but it’s especially true during the first session. Every blank is another cool thing waiting to happen; leave yourself a stock of them.

#### Look for interesting facts
There are some ideas that, when you hear them, just jump out at you. When you hear one of those ideas, just write it down. When a player mentions the Duke of Sorrows being the demon he bargained with, note it. That little fact is the seed for a whole world.

#### Help the players understand the moves
You’ve already read the game, the players may not have, so it’s up to you to help them if they need it. The fact is, they likely won’t need it much. All they have to do is describe what their character does, the rules take care of the rest.

The one place they may need some help is remembering the triggers for the moves. Keep an ear out for actions that trigger moves, like attacking in melee or consulting their knowledge. After a few moves the players will likely remember them on their own.

#### Give each character a chance to shine
As a fan of the heroes (remember your agenda?) you want to see them do what they do best. Give them a chance at this, not by tailoring every room to their skills, but by portraying a fantastic world (agenda again) where there are many solutions to every challenge.

#### Introduce NPCs
NPCs bring the world to life. If every monster does nothing more than attack and every blacksmith sets out their wares for simple payment the world is dead. Instead give your characters, especially those that the players show an interest in, life (principles, remember?). Introduce NPCs but don’t protect them. The recently deceased Lord of Goblins is just as useful for future adventures as the one who’s still alive.

## After the First Session
Once you’re done with the first session take some time to relax. Let ideas ferment. Don’t rush into the next session.

Once you’ve had some time to relax and think over the first session it’s time to prepare for the next session. Preparing for the second session takes a few minutes, maybe an hour if this is your first time. You’ll create fronts, maybe make some monsters or custom moves, and generally get an idea of what is going on in the world.

# Fronts
Fronts are secret tomes of GM knowledge. Each is a collection of linked dangers—threats to the characters specifically and to the people, places, and things the characters care about. It also includes one or more impending dooms, the horrible things that will happen without the characters’ intervention. “Fronts” comes, of course, from “fighting on two fronts” which is just where you want the characters to be -- surrounded by threats, danger and adventure.

Fronts are built outside of active play. They’re the solo fun that you get to have between games—rubbing your hands and cackling evilly to yourself as you craft the foes with which to challenge your PCs. You may tweak or adjust your fronts during play (who knows when inspiration will strike?) but the meat of them comes from preparation between sessions.

Fronts are designed to help you organize your thoughts on what opposes the players. They’re here to contain your notes, ideas, and plans for these opposing forces. When you’re in a bind your fronts are where you’re going to turn and say, “Oh, so _that’s_ what I should do.” Consider them an organizational tool, as inspiration for present and future mayhem.

When you’re building fronts, think about all the creepy dungeon denizens, the rampaging hordes and ancient cults that you’d like to see in your game. Think in broad strokes at first and then, as you build dangers into your fronts, you’ll be able to narrow those ideas down. When you write your campaign front, think about session-to-session trends. When you write your adventure fronts, think about what’s important right here and right now. When you’re done writing a few fronts you’ll be equipped with all the tools you’ll need to challenge your players and ready to run Dungeon World.

### When to Make Fronts
You’ll make your campaign front and first adventure fronts after your first session. Your campaign front may not be complete when you first make it -- that’s great! Just like blanks on a map, unknown parts of your campaign front are opportunities for future creativity.

After that first session you’ll also make some adventure fronts. One or two is usually a good number. If you find yourself with more adventure fronts consider leaving some possible fronts as just notes for now.

### Campaign and Adventure Fronts
At their core, all fronts contain the same components. They sort and gather your dangers into easy-to-use clusters. There are, however, two different kinds of fronts available to you. On the session-to-session level there are your adventure fronts. These fronts will see use for a few sessions each. They’re tied to one problem and will be dealt with or cast aside as the characters wander the dungeon or uncover the plot at hand. Think of them as episodic content: “Today, on Dungeon World…”

Tying your adventure fronts together is your campaign front. While the adventure fronts will contain immediate dangers—the orcs in Hargrosh Pass, say—the campaign front contains the Dark God Grishkar who drives the orcs to their pillaging. The campaign front is the unifying element that spans all the sessions of your Dungeon World game. It will have slower-burning portents but they’ll be bigger in scope and have a deeper impact on the world. Most importantly they’ll be scarier if they’re allowed to resolve.

When a danger from an adventure front goes without resolution you’ll have to make a decision. If the danger is something you like and feel has a place in the larger world of your game don’t hesitate to move it to the campaign front. You’re able to make smaller dangers that went unresolved into bigger dangers some day later on. You can move dangers from the campaign fronts to an adventure front if they’ve come to bear, too.

## Creating Fronts
Here’s how a front comes together:
- Choose campaign front or adventure front
- Create 2-3 dangers
- Choose an impending doom for each danger
- Add grim portents (1-3 for an adventure front, 3-5 for the campaign front)
- Write 1–3 stakes questions
- List the general cast of the front

## Creating Dangers
Not every element of your game will warrant a danger—traps, some roving monsters, and other bits of ephemera may just be there to add context but aren’t important enough to warrant inclusion. That’s okay. Fronts are here to keep you apprised of the bigger picture. Dangers are divided into a handful of categories, each with its own name and impulse.

Every danger has a crucial motivation that drives it called its impulse. The impulse exists to help you understand that danger. What pushes it to fulfill its impending doom? Impulses can help you translate the danger into action.

When creating dangers for your front, think about how each one interacts as a facet of the front as a whole. Keep in mind the people, places, and things that might be a part of the threat to the world that the front represents. How does each danger contribute to the front?

Let’s say we have an idea for a front—an ancient portal has been discovered in the icy north. We’ll call our front “The Opening of the White Gate.”

The easiest place to start is with people and monsters. Cultists, ogre chieftains, demonic overlords, and the like are all excellent dangers. These are the creatures that have risen above mere monster status to become serious threats on their own. Groups of monsters can be dangers too—goblin tribes or a rampaging centaur khanate, for example.

For the front we’re creating, we can pick a few different groups or people who might be interested in the gate. The College of Arcanists, perhaps. There’s a golem, too, we’ve decided, that protects the forgotten portal. The golem is just an obstacle, so we won’t make him a danger.

Thinking more broadly, less obvious elements of the world can be dangers. Blasted landscapes, intelligent magical items, ancient spells woven into the fabric of time. These things fulfill the same purposes as a mad necromancer—they’re part of the front, a danger to the world.

For our front, we’ll add the gate itself as a danger.

Lastly, if we think ahead, we can include some overarching dangers. The sorts of things that are in play outside the realm of the obvious—godly patrons, hidden conspiracies and cursed prophecies waiting to be fulfilled.

Perhaps the White Gate was carved in the ancient past, hidden by a race of angels until the Day of Judgement. We’ll add the Argent Seraphim to our front as a new danger.

Perhaps the White Gate was carved in the ancient past, hidden by a race of angels until the Day of Judgement. We’ll add the Argent Seraphim to our front as a new danger.

There’s always more dangers you could add to a front, but limit yourself to 3 at most and leave room for discovery. Like a map, blank spaces can always be filled in later. Leaving room for player contribution and future inspiration means you’ll have freedom to alter the front and make it fit the game. Not every bad thing that could happen deserves to be made into a danger. If you’re uncertain, think about it this way: dangers can always get worse.

A barbarian tribe near the gate, the frozen tundra itself, a band of rival adventurers; all these things could be dangerous elements of the game but they’re not important enough just yet to deserve to be dangers.

Creating dangers is a way to slice up your overall front concept into smaller, easier to manage pieces. Dangers are tools for adding detail to the right parts of the front and for making the front easier to manage in the long run.

Once you’ve named and added a danger to the front you need to choose a type for that danger from the list below. Alternately, you can use the list of types to inspire dangers: with your front in mind, peruse the list and pick one or two that fit.

For our three dangers (The College of Arcanists, The White Gate and the Argent Seraphim) we’ve selected Cabal, Dark Portal and Choir of Angels, respectively.

## Types of Dangers
- Ambitious Organizations
- Planar Forces
- Arcane Enemies
- Hordes
- Cursed Places

### Ambitious Organizations
- Misguided Good (_impulse: to do what is “right” no matter the cost_)
- Thieves Guild (_impulse: to take by subterfuge_)
- Cult (_impulse: to infest from within_)
- Religious Organization (_impulse: to establish and follow doctrine_)
- Corrupt Government (_impulse: to maintain the status quo_)
- Cabal (_impulse: to absorb those in power, to grow_)

#### GM Moves for Ambitious Organizations
- Attack someone by stealthy means (kidnapping, etc.)
- Attack someone directly (with a gang or single assailant)
- Absorb or buy out someone important (an ally, perhaps)
- Influence a powerful institution (change a law, manipulate doctrine)
- Establish a new rule (within the organization)
- Claim territory or resources
- Negotiate a deal
- Observe a potential foe in great detail

### Planar Forces
- God (_impulse: to gather worshippers_)
- Demon Prince (_impulse: to open the gates of Hell_)
- Elemental Lord (_impulse: to tear down creation to its component parts_)
- Force of Chaos (_impulse: to destroy all semblance of order_)
- Choir of Angels (_impulse: to pass judgement_)
- Construct of Law (_impulse: to eliminate perceived disorder_)

#### GM Moves for Planar Forces
- Turn an organization (corrupt or infiltrate with influence)
- Give dreams of prophecy
- Lay a Curse on a foe
- Extract a promise in exchange for a boon
- Attack indirectly, through intermediaries
- Rarely, when the stars are right, attack directly
- Foster rivalries with other, similar powers
- Expose someone to a Truth, wanted or otherwise

### Arcane Enemies
- Lord of the Undead (_impulse: to seek true immortality_)
- Power-mad Wizard (_impulse: to seek magical power_)
- Sentient Artifact (_impulse: to find a worthy wielder_)
- Ancient Curse (_impulse: to ensnare_)
- Chosen One (_impulse: to fulfill or resent their destiny_)
- Dragon (_impulse: to hoard gold and jewels, to protect the clutch_)

#### GM Moves for Arcane Enemies
- Learn forbidden knowledge
- Cast a spell over time and space
- Attack a foe with magic, directly or otherwise
- Spy on someone with a scrying spell
- Recruit a follower or toady
- Tempt someone with promises
- Demand a sacrifice

### Hordes
- Wandering Barbarians (_impulse: to grow strong, to drive their enemies before them_)
- Humanoid Vermin (_impulse: to breed, to multiply and consume_)
- Underground Dwellers (_impulse: to defend the complex from outsiders_)
- Plague of the Undead (_impulse: to spread_)

#### GM Moves for Hordes
- Assault a bastion of civilization
- Embrace internal chaos
- Change direction suddenly
- Overwhelm a weaker force
- Perform a show of dominance
- Abandon an old home, find a new one
- Grow in size by breeding or conquest
- Appoint a champion
- Declare war and act upon that declaration without hesitation or deliberation

### Cursed Places
- Abandoned Tower (_impulse: to draw in the weak-willed_)
- Unholy Ground (_impulse: to spawn evil_)
- Elemental Vortex (_impulse: to grow, to tear apart reality_)
- Dark Portal (_impulse: to disgorge demons_)
- Shadowland (_impulse: to corrupt or consume the living_)
- Place of Power (_impulse: to be controlled or tamed_)

#### GM Moves for Cursed Places
- Vomit forth a lesser monster
- Spread to an adjacent place
- Lure someone in
- Grow in intensity or depth
- Leave a lingering effect on an inhabitant or visitor
- Hide something from sight
- Offer power
- Dampen magic or increase its effects
- Confuse or obfuscate truth or direction
- Corrupt a natural law

### Description and Cast
Write up something short to remind you just what this danger is about, something to describe it in a nutshell. Don’t worry about where it’s going or what could happen—grim portents and the impending doom will handle that for you; you’ll get to those in a bit. If there are multiple people involved in the danger (an orc warlord and his clansmen, a hateful god and his servants) go ahead and give them names and a detail or two now. Leave yourself some space as you’ll be adding to this section as you play.

### Grim Portents
Grim portents are dark designs for what could happen if a danger goes unchecked. Think about what would happen if the danger existed in the world but the PCs didn’t—if all these awful things you’ve conjured up had their run of the world. Scary, huh? The grim portents are your way to codify the plans and machinations of your dangers. A grim portent can be a single interesting event or a chain of steps. When you’re not sure what to do next, push your danger towards resolving a grim portent.

More often than not grim portents have a logical order. The orcs tear down the city only after the peace talks fail, for example. A simple front will progress from bad to worse to much worse in a clear path forward. Sometimes, grim portents are unconnected pathways to the impending doom. The early manifestations of danger might not all be related. It’s up to you to decide how complex your front will be. Whenever a danger comes to pass, check the other dangers in the front. In a complex front, you may need to cross off or alter the grim portents. That’s fine, you’re allowed. Keep scale in mind, too. Grim portents don’t all have to be world-shaking. They can simply represent a change in direction for a danger. Some new way for it to cause trouble in the world.

Think of your grim portents as possible moves waiting in the wings. When the time is right, unleash them on the world.

I’ve chosen a few grim portents for my new front.
- The College sends an expedition to the Gate
- The Key is discovered
- The First Trumpet sounds
- A Champion is chosen
- The Second Trumpet sounds
- The Herald appears
- The Gate is Opened

When a grim portent comes to pass, check it off—the prophecy has come true! A grim portent that has come to pass might have ramifications for your other fronts, too. Have a quick look when your players aren’t demanding your attention and feel free to make changes. One small grim portent may resound across the whole campaign in subtle ways.

You can advance a grim portent descriptively or prescriptively. Descriptively means that you’ve seen the change happen during play, so you mark it off. Maybe the players sided with the goblin tribes against their lizardman enemies—now the goblins control the tunnels. Lo and behold, this was the next step in a grim portent. Prescriptive is when, due to a failed player move or a golden opportunity, you advance the grim portent as your hard move. That step comes to pass, show its effects and keep on asking, “What do you do, now?”

### Impending Doom
At the end of every danger’s path is an impending doom. This is the final toll of the bell that signals the danger’s triumphant resolution. When a grim portent comes to pass the impending doom grows stronger, more apparent and present in the world. These are the very bad things that every danger, in some way, seeks to bring into effect. Choose one of the types of impending dooms and give it a concrete form in your front. These often change in play, as the characters meddle in the affairs of the world. Don’t fret, you can change them later.
- Tyranny (of the strong over the weak or the few over the many)
- Pestilence (the spread of sickness and disease, the end of wellness)
- Destruction (apocalypse, ruin and woe)
- Usurpation (the chain of order comes apart, someone rightful is displaced)
- Impoverishment (enslavement, the abandonment of goodness and right)
- Rampant Chaos (laws of reality, of society, or any order is dissolved)

When all of the grim portents of a danger come to pass, the impending doom sets in. The danger is then resolved but the setting has changed in some meaningful way. This will almost certainly change the front at large as well. Making sure that these effects reverberate throughout the world is a big part of making them feel real.

### Stakes
Your stakes questions are 1-3 questions about people, places, or groups that you’re interested in. People include PCs and NPCs, your choice. Remember that your agenda includes “Play to find out what happens?” Stakes are a way of reminding yourself what you want to find out.

Stakes are concrete and clear. Don’t write stakes about vague feelings or incremental changes. Stakes are about important changes that affect the PCs and the world. A good stakes question is one that, when it’s resolved, means that things will never be the same again.

The most important thing about stakes is that you find them interesting. Your stakes should be things that you genuinely want to know, but that you’re also willing to leave to be resolved through play. Once you’ve written it as a stake, it’s out of your hands, you don’t get to just make it up anymore. Now you have to play to find out.

Playing to find out is one of the biggest rewards of playing Dungeon World. You’ve written down something tied to events happening in the world that you want to find out about—now you get to do just that.

Once you have your stakes your front is ready to play.

My stakes questions include, as tailored to my group:
- Who will be the champion?
- How will Lux respond to the Light From Beyond?
- Will the College be able to recruit Avon?

## Resolving a Front
Often a front will be resolved in a simple and straightforward manner. A front representing a single dungeon may have its dangers killed, turned to good, or overcome by some act of heroism. In this case the front is dissolved and set aside. Maybe there are elements of the front—dangers that go unresolved or leftover members of a danger that’s been cleared—that live on. Maybe they move to the campaign front as brand new dangers?

The campaign front will need a bit more effort to resolve. It’ll be working slowly and subtly as the course of the campaign rolls along. You won’t introduce or resolve it all at once, but in pieces. The characters work towards defeating the various minions of the big bad that lives in your campaign front. In the end, though, you’ll know that the campaign front is resolved when the Dark God is confronted or the undead plague claims the world and the heroes emerge bloodied but victorious or defeated and despairing. Campaign fronts take longer to deal with but in the end they’re the most satisfying to resolve.

When a front is resolved take some extra time to sit down and look at the aftermath. Did any grim portents come to pass? Even if a danger is stopped, if any grim portents are fulfilled, the world is changed, if only in subtle ways. Keep this in mind when you write your future fronts. Is there anyone who could be moved from the now-defeated front to somewhere else? Anyone get promoted or reduced in stature? The resolution of a front is an important event!

When you resolve an adventure front usually that means the adventure itself has been resolved. This is a great time to take a break and look at your campaign front. Let it inspire your next adventure front. Write up a new adventure front or polish off one you’ve been working on, draw a few maps to go with it and get ready for the next big thing.

## Multiple Adventure Fronts
As you start your campaign you’re likely to have a lightly detailed campaign front and one or two detailed adventure fronts. Characters may choose, part- way through an adventure, to pursue some other course. You might end up with a handful of partly-resolved adventure fronts. Not only is this okay, it’s a great way to explore a world that feels alive and organic. Always remember, fronts continue along apace no matter whether the characters are there to see them or not. Think off-screen, especially where fronts are concerned.

When running two adventure fronts at the same time they can be intertwined or independent. The anarchists corrupting the city from the inside are a different front from the orcs massing outside the walls, but they’d both be in play at once. On the other hand one dungeon could have multiple fronts at play within its walls: the powers and effects of the cursed place itself and the warring humanoid tribes that inhabit it.

A situation warrants multiple adventure fronts when there are multiple impending dooms, all equally potent but not necessarily related. The impending doom of the anarchists is chaos in the city, the impending doom of the orcs is its utter ruination. They are two separate fronts with their own dangers. They’ll deal with each other, as well, so there’s some room for the players choosing sides or attempting to turn the dangers of one front against the other.

When dealing with multiple adventure fronts the players are likely to prioritize. The cult needs attention now, the orcs can wait, or vice versa. These decisions lead to the slow advancement of the neglected front, eventually causing more problems for the characters and leading to new adventures. This can get complex once you’ve got three or four fronts in play. Take care not to get overwhelmed.

# The GM
There are many different fantasy genres, each with their own style or advice for GMing. Dungeon World is designed for one of those styles in particular—a world of elves, orcs, dragons and magic where dark dangers mix with lighthearted adventure. The rules in this chapter will help you run a game in that style.

The characters have rules to follow when they roll dice and take actions. The GM has rules to follow, too. You’ll be refereeing, adjudicating, and describing the world as you go—Dungeon World provides a framework to guide you in doing so.

This chapter isn’t about advice for the GM or optional tips and tricks on how best to play Dungeon World. It’s a chapter with procedures and rules for whoever takes on the role of GM.

### GMing Dungeon World: A Framework
Running a game of Dungeon World is built on these: the GM’s agenda, principles, and moves. The agenda is what you set out to do when you sit down at the table. The principles are the guides that keep you focused on that agenda. The GM’s moves are the concrete, moment-to-moment things you do to move the game forward. You’ll make moves when players miss their rolls, when the rules call for it, and whenever the players look to you to see what happens. Your moves keep the fiction consistent and the game’s action moving forward.

The GM’s agenda, principles, and moves are rules just like damage or stats or HP. You should take the same care in altering them or ignoring them that you would with any other rule.

## How to GM
When you sit down at the table as a GM you do these things:
- Describe the situation
- Follow the rules
- Make moves
- Exploit your prep

The players have it easy—they just say what their characters say, think, and do. You have it a bit harder. You have to say everything else. What does that entail?

First and foremost, you **describe the immediate situation around the players at all times**. This is how you start a session, how you get things rolling after a snack break, get back on track after a great joke: tell them what the situation is in concrete terms.

Use detail and senses to draw them in. The situation isn’t just an orc charging you, it’s an orc painted in blood swinging a hammer and yelling bloody murder. You can leverage a lack of information, too. The sound of clattering armor and shuffling feet, for instance.

The situation around them is rarely “everything’s great, nothing to worry about.” They’re adventurers going on adventures—give them something to react to.

When you describe the situation, always end with “What do you do?” Dungeon World is about action and adventure! Portray a situation that demands a response.

From the get-go make sure to **follow the rules**. This means your GM rules, sure, but also keep an eye on the players’ moves. It’s everyone’s responsibility to watch for when a move has been triggered, including you. Stop the players and ask if they mean to trigger the rules when it sounds like that’s what they’re doing.

Part of following the rules is **making moves**. Your moves are different than player moves and we’ll describe them in detail in a bit. Your moves are specific things you can do to change the flow of the game.

In all of these things, **exploit your prep**. At times you’ll know something the players don’t yet know. You can use that knowledge to help you make moves. Maybe the wizard tries to cast a spell and draws unwanted attention. They don’t know that the attention that just fell on them was the ominous gaze of a demon waiting two levels below, but you do.

## Agenda
Your agenda makes up the things you aim to do at all times while GMing a game of Dungeon World:
- Portray a fantastic world
- Fill the characters’ lives with adventure
- Play to find out what happens

Everything you say and do at the table (and away from the table, too) exists to accomplish these three goals and no others. Things that aren’t on this list aren’t your goals. You’re not trying to beat the players or test their ability to solve complex traps. You’re not here to give the players a chance to explore your finely crafted setting. You’re not trying to kill the players (though monsters might be). You’re most certainly not here to tell everyone a planned-out story.

Your first agenda is to **portray a fantastic world**. Dungeon World is all about guts, guile, and bravery against darkness and doom. It’s about characters who have decided to take up a life of adventure in the hopes of some glorious reward. It’s your job to participate in that by showing the players a world in which their characters can find that adventure. Without the player characters the world would fall into chaos or destruction—it might still even with them. It’s up to you to portray the fantastic elements of that world. Show the players the wonders of the world they’re in and encourage them to react to it.

**Filling the characters’ lives with adventure** means working with the players to create a world that’s engaging and dynamic. Adventurers are always caught up in some world-threatening danger or another—encourage and foster that kind of action in the game.

Dungeon World adventures **never** presume player actions. A Dungeon World adventure portrays a setting in motion—someplace significant with creatures big and small pursuing their own goals. As the players come into conflict with that setting and its denizens, action is inevitable. You’ll honestly portray the repercussions of that action.

This is how you **play to find out what happens**. You’re sharing in the fun of finding out how the characters react to and change the world you’re portraying. You’re all participants in a great adventure that’s unfolding. So really, don’t plan too hard. The rules of the game will fight you. It’s fun to see how things unfold, trust us.

## Principles
- Draw maps, leave blanks
- Address the characters, not the players
- Embrace the fantastic
- Make a move that follows
- Never speak the name of your move
- Give every monster life
- Name every person
- Ask questions and use the answers
- Be a fan of the characters
- Think dangerous
- Begin and end with the fiction
- Think offscreen, too

Your principles are your guides. Often, when it’s time to make a move, you’ll already have an idea of what makes sense. Consider it in light of your principles and go with it, if it fits.

#### Draw maps, leave blanks
Dungeon World exists mostly in the imaginations of the people playing it; maps help everyone stay on the same page. You won’t always be drawing them yourself, but any time there’s a new location described make sure it gets added to a map.

When you draw a map don’t try to make it complete. Leave room for the unknown. As you play you’ll get more ideas and the players will give you inspiration to work with. Let the maps expand and change.

#### Address the characters, not the players
Addressing the characters, not the players, means that you don’t say, “Tony, is Dunwick doing something about that wight?” Instead you say, “Dunwick, what are you doing about the wight?” Speaking this way keeps the game focused on the fiction and not on the table. It’s important to the flow of the game, too. If you talk to the players you may leave out details that are important to what moves the characters make. Since moves are always based on the actions of the character you need to think about what’s happening in terms of those characters—not the players portraying them.

#### Embrace the fantastic
Magic, strange vistas, gods, demons, and abominations: the world is full of mystery and magic. Embrace that in your prep and in play. Think about “the fantastic” on various scales. Think about floating cities or islands crafted from the corpse of a god. Think about village wise-men and their spirit familiars or the statue that the local bandits touch to give them luck. The characters are interesting people, empowered by their gods, their skill at arms, or by mystical training. The world should be just as engaging.

#### Make a move that follows
When you make a move what you’re actually doing is taking an element of the fiction and bringing it to bear against the characters. Your move should always follow from the fiction. They help you focus on one aspect of the current situation and do something interesting with it. What’s going on? What move makes sense here?

#### Never speak the name of your move
There is no quicker way to ruin the consistency of Dungeon World than to tell the players what move you’re making. Your moves are prompts to you, not things you say directly.

You never show the players that you’re picking a move from a list. You know the reason the slavers dragged off Omar was because you made the “put someone in a spot” move, but you show it to the players as a straightforward outcome of their actions, since it is.

#### Give every monster life
Monsters are fantastic creatures with their own motivations (simple or complex). Give each monster details that bring it to life: smells, sights, sounds. Give each one enough to make it real, but don’t cry when it gets beat up or overthrown. That’s what player characters do!

#### Name every person
Anyone that the players speak with has a name. They probably have a personality and some goals or opinions too, but you can figure that out as you go. Start with a name. The rest can flow from there.

#### Ask questions and use the answers
Part of playing to find out what happens is explicitly not knowing everything, and being curious. If you don’t know something, or you don’t have an idea, ask the players and use what they say.

The easiest question to use is “What do you do?” Whenever you make a move, end with “What do you do?” You don’t even have to ask the person you made the move against. Take that chance to shift the focus elsewhere: “Rath’s spell is torn apart with a flick of the mage’s wand. Finnegan, that spell was aiding you. What are you doing now that it’s gone?”

#### Be a fan of the characters
Think of the players’ characters as protagonists in a story you might see on TV. Cheer for their victories and lament their defeats. You’re not here to push them in any particular direction, merely to participate in fiction that features them and their action.

#### Think dangerous
Everything in the world is a target. You’re thinking like an evil overlord: no single life is worth anything and there is nothing sacrosanct. Everything can be put in danger, everything can be destroyed. Nothing you create is ever protected. Whenever your eye falls on something you’ve created, think how it can be put in danger, fall apart or crumble. The world changes. Without the characters’ intervention, it changes for the worse.

#### Begin and end with the fiction
Everything you and the players do in Dungeon World comes from and leads to fictional events. When the players make a move, they take a fictional action to trigger it, apply the rules, and get a fictional effect. When you make a move it always comes from the fiction.

#### Think offscreen too
Just because you’re a fan of the characters doesn’t mean everything happens right in front of them. Sometimes your best move is in the next room, or another part of the dungeon, or even back in town. Make your move elsewhere and show its effects when they come into the spotlight.

## Moves
Whenever everyone looks to you to see what happens choose one of these. Each move is something that occurs in the fiction of the game—they aren’t code words or special terms. “Use up their resources” literally means to expend the resources of the characters, for example.
- Use a monster, danger, or location move
- Reveal an unwelcome truth
- Show signs of an approaching threat
- Deal damage
- Use up their resources
- Turn their move back on them
- Separate them
- Give an opportunity that fits a class’ abilities
- Show a downside to their class, race, or equipment
- Offer an opportunity, with or without cost
- Put someone in a spot
- Tell them the requirements or consequences and ask

Never speak the name of your move (that’s one of your principles). Make it a real thing that happens to them: “As you dodge the hulking ogre’s club, you slip and land hard. Your sword goes sliding away into the darkness. You think you saw where it went but the ogre is lumbering your way. What do you do?”

No matter what move you make, always follow up with “What do you do?” Your moves are a way of fulfilling your agenda—part of which is to fill the characters’ lives with adventure. When a spell goes wild or the floor drops out from under them adventurers react or suffer the consequences of inaction.

### When to Make a Move
You make a move:
- When everyone looks to you to find out what happens
- When the players give you a golden opportunity
- When they roll a 6-

Generally when the players are just looking at you to find out what happens you make a soft move, otherwise you make a hard move.

A soft move is one without immediate, irrevocable consequences. That usually means it’s something not all that bad, like revealing that there’s more treasure if they can just find a way past the golem (offer an opportunity with cost). It can also mean that it’s something bad, but they have time to avoid it, like having the goblin archers loose their arrows (show signs of an approaching threat) with a chance for them to dodge out of danger.

A soft move ignored becomes a golden opportunity for a hard move. If the players do nothing about the hail of arrows flying towards them it’s a golden opportunity to use the deal damage move.

Hard moves, on the other hand, have immediate consequences. Dealing damage is almost always a hard move, since it means a loss of HP that won’t be recovered without some action from the players.

When you have a chance to make a hard move you can opt for a soft one instead if it better fits the situation. Sometimes things just work out for the best.

### Choosing a Move
To choose a move, start by looking at the obvious consequences of the action that triggered it. If you already have an idea, think on it for a second to make sure it fits your agenda and principles and then do it. Let your moves snowball. Build on the success or failure of the characters’ moves and on your own previous moves.

If your first instinct is that this won’t hurt them now, but it’ll come back to bite them later, great! That’s part of your principles (think offscreen too). Make a note of and reveal it when the time is right.

### Making your Move
When making a move, keep your principles in mind. In particular, never speak the name of your move and address the characters, not the players. Your moves are not mechanical actions happening around the table. They are concrete events happening to the characters in the fictional world you are describing.

Note that “deal damage” is a move, but other moves may include damage as well. When an ogre flings you against a wall you take damage as surely as if he had smashed you with his fists.

After every move you make, always ask “What do you do?”

#### Use a monster, danger, or location move
Every monster in an adventure has moves associated with it, as do many locations. A monster or location move is just a description of what that location or monster does, maybe “hurl someone away” or “bridge the planes.” If a player move (like hack and slash) says that a monster gets to make an attack, make an aggressive move with that monster.

The overarching dangers of the adventure also have moves associated with them. Use these moves to bring that danger into play, which may mean more monsters.

#### Reveal an unwelcome truth
An unwelcome truth is a fact the players wish wasn’t true: that the room’s been trapped, maybe, or that the helpful goblin is actually a spy. Reveal to the players just how much trouble they’re in.

#### Show signs of an approaching threat
This is one of your most versatile moves. “Threat” means anything bad that’s on the way. With this move, you just show them that something’s going to happen unless they do something about it.

#### Deal damage
When you deal damage, choose one source of damage that’s fictionally threatening a character and apply it. In combat with a lizard man? It stabs you. Triggered a trap? Rocks fall on you.

The amount of damage is decided by the source. In some cases, this move might involve trading damage both ways, with the character also dealing damage.

Most damage is based on a die roll. When a player takes damage, tell them what to roll. You never need to touch the dice. If the player is too cowardly to find out their own fate, they can ask another player to roll for them.

#### Use up their resources
Surviving in a dungeon, or anywhere dangerous, often comes down to supplies. With this move, something happens to use up some resource: weapons, armor, healing, ongoing spells. You don’t always have to use it up permanently. A sword might just be flung to the other side of the room, not shattered.

#### Turn Their Move Back On Them
Think about the benefits a move might grant a character and turn them around in a negative way. Alternately, grant the same advantage to someone who has it out for the characters. If Ivy has learned of Duke Horst’s men approaching from the east, maybe a scout has spotted her, too.

#### Separate Them
There are few things worse than being in the middle of a raging battle with blood-thirsty owlbears on all sides—one of those things is being in the middle of that battle with no one at your back.

Separating the characters can mean anything from being pushed apart in the heat of battle to being teleported to the far end of the dungeon. Whatever way it occurs, it’s bound to cause problems.

#### Give an opportunity that fits a class’ abilities
The thief disables traps, sneaks, and picks locks. The cleric deals with the divine and the dead. Every class has things that they shine at—present an opportunity that plays to what one class shines at.

It doesn’t have to be a class that’s in play right now though. Sometimes a locked door stands between you and treasure and there’s no thief in sight. This is an invitation for invention, bargaining, and creativity. If all you’ve got is a bloody axe doesn’t every problem look like a skull?

#### Show a downside to their class, race, or equipment
Just as every class shines, they all have their weaknesses too. Do orcs have a special thirst for elven blood? Is the cleric’s magic disturbing dangerous forces? The torch that lights the way also draws attention from eyes in the dark.

#### Offer an opportunity, with or without cost
Show them something they want: riches, power, glory. If you want, you can associate some cost with it too, of course.

Remember to lead with the fiction. You don’t say, “This area isn’t dangerous so you can make camp here, if you’re willing to take the time.” You make it a solid fictional thing and say, “Helferth’s blessings still hang around the shattered altar. It’s a nice safe spot, but the chanting from the ritual chamber is getting louder. What do you do?”

#### Put someone in a spot
A spot is someplace where a character needs to make tough choices. Put them, or something they care about, in the path of destruction. The harder the choice, the tougher the spot.

#### Tell them the requirements or consequences and ask
This move is particularly good when they want something that’s not covered by a move, or they’ve failed a move. They can do it, sure, but they’ll have to pay the price. Or, they can do it, but there will be consequences. Maybe they can swim through the shark-infested moat before being devoured, but they’ll need a distraction. Of course, this is made clear to the characters, not just the players: the sharks are in a starved frenzy, for example.

## Dungeon Moves
Dungeon Moves are a special subset that are used to make or alter a dungeon on the fly. Use these if your players are exploring a hostile area that you don’t already have planned completely.

Map out the area being explored as you make these moves. Most of them will require you to add a new room or element to your map.
- Change the environment
- Point to a looming threat
- Introduce a new faction or type of creature
- Use a threat from an existing faction or type of creature
- Make them backtrack
- Present riches at a price
- Present a challenge to one of the characters

You can make these moves whenever everyone looks to you to say something, when the players present you an opportunity, or when the players miss on a roll. They’re particularly well-suited for when the characters enter a new room or hallway and want to know what they find there.

You can make these moves whenever everyone looks to you to say something, when the players present you an opportunity, or when the players miss on a roll. They’re particularly well-suited for when the characters enter a new room or hallway and want to know what they find there.

#### Change the environment
The environment is the general feel of the area the players are in: carved tunnels, warped trees, safe trails, or whatever else. This is your opportunity to introduce them to a new environment: the tunnels gradually become naturally carved, the trees are dead and strange, or the trails are lost and the wilderness takes over. Use this move to vary the types of areas and creatures the players will face.

#### Point to a looming threat
If you know that something is lurking and waiting for the players to stumble upon it, this move shows them the signs and clues. This move is the dragon’s footprints in the mud or the slimy trail of the gelatinous cube.

#### Introduce a new faction or type of creature
A type of creature is a broad grouping: orcs, goblins, lizardmen, the undead, etc.

A faction is a group of creatures united by a similar goal. Once you introduce them you can begin to make moves and cause trouble for the players with those creatures or NPCs.

Introducing means giving some clear sensory evidence or substantiated information. Don’t be coy; the players should have some idea what you’re showing the presence of. You can, however, be subtle in your approach. No need to have the cultist overlord waving a placard and screaming in the infernal tongue every single time.

A hard application of this move will snowball directly into a combat scene or ambush.

#### Use a threat from an existing faction or type of creature
Once the characters have been introduced to the presence of a faction or type of creature you can use moves of monsters of that type.

Use the factions and types broadly. Orcs are accompanied with their hunting worgs. A mad cult probably has some undead servants or maybe a few beasts summoned from the abyssal pits. This is a move that, often, you’ll be making subconsciously—it’s just implementing the tools you’ve set out for yourself in a clear and effective manner.

#### Make them backtrack
Look back at the spaces you’ve added to the map. Is there anything useful there as yet undiscovered? Can you add a new obstacle that can only be overcome by going back there? Is there a locked door here and now whose key lies in an earlier room?

When backtracking, show the effect that time has had on the areas they’ve left behind. What new threats have sprung up in their wake? What didn’t they take care of that’s waiting for their return?

Use this move the make the dungeon a living, breathing place. There is no stasis in the wake of the characters’ passing. Add reinforcements, cave in walls, cause chaos. The dungeon evolves in the wake of the characters’ actions.

#### Present riches at a price
What do the players want? What would they sacrifice for it?

Put some desirable item just out of reach. Find something they’re short on: time, HP, gear, whatever. Find a way to make what they want available if they give up what they have.

The simplest way to use this move is the promise of gold out of the way of the main objective. Will they stop to pry the ruby eyes from the idol when they know that the sacrifice looms closer and closer? Use this move and you can find out.

#### Present a challenge to one of the characters
Challenge a character by looking at what they’re good at. Give the thief a lock to pick, show the cleric servants of an enemy god to battle against. Give the wizard magical mysteries to investigate. Show the fighter some skulls to crack. Give someone a chance to shine.

As an alternative, challenge a character by looking at what they’re bad at or what they’ve left unresolved. If the bard has a complicated lie on his conscience, what steps will he take to cover it up when someone figures him out? If the wizard has been summoning demons, what happens when word gets out?

This move can give a character the spotlight—even if just for a moment. Try to give everyone a chance to be the focus of play using this move from session to session.

## Dealing With Common Situations
There are some common situations that come up in Dungeon World. Here’s how to deal with them.

#### Fights
Sooner or later blades are drawn and blood is shed. When this happens the players are likely to start hacking and slashing, volleying, and defending. Think about more than just the exchange of damage. Monsters might be trying to capture the characters or protect something from them. Understand what the fight is about; what each side wants and how that might affect the tide of battle.

No self-respecting monster just stands still for their beating. Combat is a dynamic thing with creatures moving in and out of range, taking cover, and retreating. Sometimes the battlefield itself shifts. Have your monsters take action that the players will react to. Make sure you’re making use of moves beyond deal damage, even in a fight.

Make sure everyone has a chance to act, and that you know where each player is during the chaos of combat. Make a map of a complex battle location so that everyone knows just what’s happening and can describe their actions appropriately.

#### Traps
Traps may come from your prep, or you can improvise them based on your moves. If nothing has established that the location is safe, traps are always an option.

The players may find traps through clever plans, trap sense, or discerning realities. If a character describes an action that doesn’t trigger a move, but the action would still discover a trap, don’t hide it from them. Traps aren’t allowed to break the rules.

#### People
Dwarven smiths, elven sages, humans of all shapes and sizes occupy the world around the characters. They’re not mindless stooges to be pushed around but they’re not what we’re playing to find out about either. The NPCs are people: they have goals and the tools to struggle towards those goals. Use them to illustrate what the world is like. Show your players the common people struggling for recognition or the noble classes seeking to uplift their people. Some whole adventures might take place in a peopled environment rather than an isolated dungeon. Some classes, the bard in particular, are adept at manipulating and using people as resources. Don’t shy away from these situations. Be a fan of these characters, giving them interesting, nuanced people to interact with.

People, just like dungeons, change over time. The passing of the characters through their lives might inspire or enrage them. The characters’ actions will cause the world to change, for good or ill, and the people they meet with will remember these changes. When the characters roll back through a town they were less-than-kind to on their previous visit, show them how the people are different now. Are they more cautious? Have they taken up a new religion? Are they hungry for revenge?

Relationships between characters are represented by the bonds but relationships with NPCs are more tenuous. If the players want to make real, lasting connections with the people of the world, they need to act. Remember, “what do you do?” is as valid a question when faced with the hopes and fears of a potential new ally or enemy as it is when staring down the business end of a longsword.

# Monsters
Great heroes need horrendous antagonists. This section is about how to create and play as those antagonists—from the lowly goblin warrior to the hellish demon.

## Using Monsters
A monster is any living (or undead) thing that stands in the characters’ way.

How you use these monsters follows directly from your agenda and principles. Stay true to your principles, use your moves and pursue your agenda—you can’t go wrong.

Your first agenda is to _portray a fantastic world_. The way you describe the monsters and adversaries the characters face can be a tool to help you fulfill that agenda. Describing those creatures and people in vivid detail will bring them to life. You’ll eventually need some stats for those monsters, too—the rules in this chapter are here to help you create those stats quickly and easily.

The player characters are the heroes. Monsters exist to illustrate what a dangerous awful place Dungeon World can be—how it will remain if the heroes don’t step in. You shouldn’t be rooting for the monsters to win, but they may challenge, and even sometimes defeat, the heroes. If you feel like your monsters are being beaten too quickly, don’t worry. Let the players revel in their victory, there’s always more monsters.

The principle of _think dangerous_ sums up that philosophy—think of every monster like an arrow fired at the characters. The monsters are ammunition of the danger you’re presenting. Some may be smarter, faster, or more dangerous than others but until a monster warrants a name, a personality, or some other special consideration, it’s an arrow. Take aim and shoot. Don’t worry if you miss.

A monster stops being mere ammunition when something in the world puts the spotlight on it. This might be a spout lore roll that leads your description in an interesting direction or the result of your asking questions and building on the players’ answers. Maybe the characters were overwhelmed in battle and had to run away, giving them a new-found fear and respect for the beast they fought. When these things happen, feel free to give the monster a name and consider creating a danger to represent it.

One thing that your agenda and principles don’t say anything about is setting up a fair fight. Heroes are often outnumbered or faced with ridiculous odds—sometimes they have to retreat and make a new plan. Sometimes they suffer loss. When adding a monster to a front, placing them in a dungeon, or making them up on the fly your first responsibility is to the fiction (_portray a fantastic world_) and to give the characters a real threat (_make the characters heroes_), not to make a balanced fight. Dungeon World isn’t about balancing encounter levels or counting experience points; it’s about adventure and death-defying feats!

## Elements of a Monster
Every monster has moves that describe its behavior and abilities. Just like the normal GM moves, they’re things that you do when there’s a lull in the action or when the players give you a golden opportunity. As with other GM moves they can be hard or soft depending on the circumstances and the move: a move that’s irreversible and immediate is hard, a move that’s impending or easy to counter is soft.

Each monster has an **instinct** that describe its goals at a high level. Some monsters live for conquest, or treasure, or simply for blood. The monster’s instinct is the guide to how to use it in the fiction.

The monster’s **description** is where all its other features come from. The description is how you know what the monster really is, the other elements just reflect the description.

**Damage** is a measure of how much pain the monster can inflict at once. Just like player damage it’s a die to roll, maybe with some modifiers. A monster deals its damage to another monster or a player whenever it causes them physical harm.

Each monster has **tags** that describe how it deals damage, including the range(s) of its attacks. When trying to attack something out of its range (too close or too far) the monster’s out of luck, no damage. Any tag that can go on a weapon (like messy or slow) can also go on a monster.

There are special tags that apply only to monsters. These tags, listed below, describe the key attributes of the monster—qualities that describe how big they are and how, if at all, they organize themselves.

A monster’s **HP** is a measure of how much damage it can take before it dies. Just like players, when a monster takes damage it subtracts that amount from its HP. At 0 HP it’s dead, no last breath.

Some monsters are lucky enough to enjoy **armor**. It’s just like player armor: when a monster with armor takes damage it subtracts its armor from the damage done.

**Special qualities** describe innate aspects of the monster that are important to play. These are a guide to the fiction, and therefore the moves. A quality like intangible means just what it says: mundane stuff just passes through it. That means swinging a mundane sword at it isn’t hack and slash, for a start.

### Monsters Without Stats
Some creatures operate on a scale so far beyond the mortal that concepts like HP, armor, and damage just do not hold. Some creatures just aren’t dangerous in a fight. These creatures may still cause problems for the players and may even be defeated with clever thinking and enough preparation.

If a creature is of such a scale far beyond the players, or if it just doesn’t put up a physical fight, don’t assign it HP, damage, or armor. You can still use the monster creation rules to give it tags. The core of a stat-less monster is its instinct and moves; you can have it make its moves and act according to its instinct even without numeric stats.

## Monster Tags

_Magical_: It is by nature magical through and through.

_Devious_: Its main danger lies beyond the simple clash of battle.

_Amorphous_: Its anatomy and organs are bizarre and unnatural.

_Organized_: It has a group structure that aids it in survival. Defeating one may cause the wrath of others. One may sound an alarm.

_Intelligent_: It’s smart enough that some individuals pick up other skills. The GM can adapt the monster by adding tags to reflect specific training, like a mage or warrior.

_Hoarder_: It almost certainly has treasure.

_Stealthy_: It can avoid detection and prefers to attack with the element of surprise.

_Terrifying_: Its presence and appearance evoke fear.

_Cautious_: It prizes survival over aggression.

_Construct_: It was made, not born

_Planar_: It’s from beyond this world

### Organization Tags

_Horde_: Where there’s one, there’s more. A lot more.

_Group_: Usually seen in small numbers, 3–6 or so.

_Solitary_: It lives and fights alone.

### Size Tags

_Tiny_: It’s much smaller than a halfling.

_Small_: It’s about halfling size.

_Large_: It’s much bigger than a human, about as big as a cart.

_Huge_: It’s as big as a small house or larger.

## Making Monsters
Monsters start with your description of them. Whether you’re making the monster before play or just as the players come face-to-face with it, every monster starts with a clear vision of what it is and what it does.

If you’re making a monster between sessions start by imagining it. Imagine what it looks like, what it does, why it stands out. Imagine the stories told about it and what effects it has had on the world.

If you’re making a monster on the fly during a session start by describing it to the players. Your description starts before the characters even lay eyes on it: describe where it lives, what marks it has made on the environment around it. Your description is the key to the monster.

When you find you need stats for the monster you use this series of questions to establish them. Answer every question based on the facts established and imagined. Don’t answer them aloud to anyone else, just note down the answers and the stats listed with each answer.

If two questions would grant the same tag don’t worry about it. If you like you can adjust damage or HP by 2 to reflect the tag that would be repeated, but it’s not necessary. If a combination of answers would reduce HP or damage below 1 they stay at 1.

When you’re finished your monster may have only one move. If this is the case and you plan on using the monster often, give it another 1–2 moves of your choice. These moves often describe secondary modes of attack, other uses for a primary mode of attack, or connections to a certain place in the world.

#### What is it known to do?
Write a monster move describing what it does.

#### How does it usually hunt or fight?
- In large groups: horde, d6 damage, 3 HP
- In small groups, about 2–5: group, d8 damage, 6 HP
- All by its lonesome: solitary, d10 damage, 12 HP

#### How big is it?
- Smaller than a house cat: tiny, hand, -2 damage
- Halfling-esque: small, close
- About human size: close
- As big as a cart: large, close, reach, +4 HP, +1 damage
- Much larger than a cart: huge, reach, +8 HP, +3 damage

#### What is its most important defense?
- Cloth or flesh: 0 armor
- Leathers or thick hide: 1 armor
- Mail or scales: 2 armor
- Plate or bone: 3 armor
- Permanent magical protection: 4 armor, magical

#### What is it known for? (Choose all that apply)
- Unrelenting strength: +2 damage, forceful
- Skill in offense: roll damage twice and take the better roll
- Skill in defense: +1 armor
- Deft strikes: +1 piercing
- Uncanny endurance: +4 HP
- Deceit and trickery: stealthy, write a move about dirty tricks
- A useful adaptation like being amphibious or having wings: Add a special quality for the adaptation
- The favor of the gods: divine, +2 damage or +2 HP or both (your call)
- Spells and magic: magical, write a move about its spells

#### What is its most common form of attack?
Note it along with the creature’s damage. Common answers include: a type of weapon, claws, a specific spell. Then answer these questions about it:
- Its armaments are vicious and obvious: +2 damage
- It lets the monster keep others at bay: reach
- Its armaments are small and weak: reduce its damage die size by one
- Its armaments can slice or pierce metal: messy, +1 piercing or +3 piercing if it can just tear metal apart
- Armor doesn’t help with the damage it deals (due to magic, size, etc.): ignores armor
- It usually attacks at range (with arrows, spells, or other projectiles): near or far or both (your call)

#### Which of these describe it? (Choose all that apply)
- It isn’t dangerous because of the wounds it inflicts, but for other reasons: devious, reduce its damage die size by one, write a move about why it’s dangerous
- It organizes into larger groups that it can call on for support: organized, write a move about calling on others for help
- It’s as smart as a human or thereabouts: intelligent
- It actively defends itself with a shield or similar: cautious, +1 Armor
- It collects trinkets that humans would consider valuable (gold, gems, secrets): hoarder
- It’s from beyond this world: planar, write a move about using its otherworldly knowledge and power
- It’s kept alive by something beyond simple biology: +4 HP
- It was made by someone: construct, give it a special quality or two about its construction or purpose
- Its appearance is disturbing, terrible, or horrible: terrifying, write a special quality about why it’s so horrendous
- It doesn’t have organs or discernible anatomy: amorphous, +1 Armor, +3 HP
- It (or its species) is ancient—older than man, elves, and dwarves: increase its damage die size by one
- It abhors violence: roll damage twice and take the worst result

## Treasure
Monsters, much like adventurers, collect shiny useful things. When the players search the belongings of a monster (be they on their person or tucked away somewhere) describe them honestly.

If the monster has accumulated some wealth you can roll that randomly. Start with the monster’s damage die, modified if the monster is:
- Hoarder: roll damage die twice, take higher result
- Far from home: add at least one ration (usable by anyone with similar taste)
- Magical: some strange item, possibly magical
- Divine: a sign of a deity (or deities)
- Planar: something not of this earth
- Lord over others: +1d4 to the roll
- Ancient and noteworthy: +1d4 to the roll

Roll the monster’s damage die plus any added dice to find the monster’s treasure:
1. A few coins, 2d8 or so
2. An item useful to the current situation
3. Several coins, about 4d10
4. A small item (gem, art) of considerable value, worth as much as 2d10×10 coins, 0 weight
5. Some minor magical trinket
6. Useful information (in the form of clues, notes, etc.)
7. A bag of coins, 1d4×100 or thereabouts. 1 weight per 100.
8. A very valuable small item (gem, art) worth 2d6×100, 0 weight
9. A chest of coins and other small valuables. 1 weight but worth 3d6×100 coins.
10. A magical item or magical effect
11. Many bags of coins for a total of 2d4×100 or so
12. A sign of office (crown, banner) worth at least 3d4×100 coins
13. A large art item worth 4d4×100 coins, 1 weight
14. A unique item worth at least 5d4×100 coins
15. All the information needed to learn a new spell and roll again
16. A portal or secret path (or directions to one) and roll again
17. Something relating to one of the characters and roll again
18. A hoard: 1d10×1000 coins and 1d10×10 gems worth 2d6×100 each

## Monster Settings
The monsters in this book are presented in monster settings. A monster setting is a type of location and the monsters you might find there. It’s a way of grouping monsters by where they fit in the world. A monster setting tells you what kind of monsters might inhabit an area while your fronts tell you what monsters are working together or have ongoing plots.

When creating your own monster settings, they can be more specific. You could create a monster setting for the Great Western Steppes or the Domains of the Horse Lords.

Consult a monster setting to populate a front or when you want a threat that is only tangentially related to one of your fronts. For example, if the heroes are battling against the dungeon front, the cult of Khul-ka-ra, by exploring the ancient ruins that the cult has made its home then you might use monsters from the Legions of the Undead as a related threat—not truly part of the front but still a block in the heroes’ path.

The monster stat blocks within the settings describe HP, damage, and all the other aspects of the monster. These monsters were created with the same process listed above, and the reasons for their stats are just as important as the stats themselves. Looking at the reasoning behind the stats will allow you to present the monsters honestly, answering questions that arise in Dungeon World like “can a warband of gnolls sack an entire village?”

### Cavern Dwellers
At the edges of civilization in the caves and tunnels below the old mountains of the world dwell all sorts of scheming, dangerous monsters. Some are wily and old, like the race of goblins scheming to burn villages and make off with livestock. Others are strange aberrations of nature like the stinking, trash- eating Otyugh. A word of caution, then, to those brave adventurers whose first foray into danger leads them into these dank and shadowy places; bad things live in the dark. Bad things with sharp teeth.

Landshark
Solitary, Huge
Bite (d10+5 damage, 3 piercing) Close, Forceful
20 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Burrowing
A seasoned caravan guard learns to listen for the calls of a scout or sentry with a keen ear. A few extra seconds after the alarm is raised can mean life or death. Different cries mean different responses, too—a call of “orcs!” means draw your sword and steady for blood but a call of “bandits!” says you might be able to bargain. One alarm from the scouts that always, always means it’s time to pack up, whip your horse and run for the hills? “LAND SHARK!” 
_Instinct_: To devour
- Drag prey into rough tunnels
- Burst from the earth
- Swallow whole


Choker 
Solitary, Stealthy, Intelligent
Choke (d10 damage) Close, Reach
15 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Flexible
Some say these things descended from the family of a cruel wizard who forced them to live out their lives underground. They say his experiments led him to fear the sun and ages passed while he descended into unlife, dragging his folk along with him. These things resemble men, in a way. Head, four limbs and all that. Only their skin is wet and rubbery and their arms long and fingers grasping. They hate all life that bears the stink of the sun’s touch, as one might expect. Jealousy, long-instilled, is hard to shake. 
_Instinct_: To deny light
- Hold someone, wringing the breath from them
- Fling a held creature

Cloaker 
Solitary, Stealthy
Constrict (d10 damage ignores armor) Close
12 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Looks like a cloak
Don’t put on that cloak, Gareth. Don’t. You don’t know where it’s been. I tell you, it’s no good. See! It moved! I’m not mad, Gareth, it moved! Don’t do it! No! GARETH! _Instinct_: To engulf
- Engulf the unsuspecting

Dwarven Warrior 
Horde, Organized
Axe (d6 damage) Close
7 HP 2 Armor
For ages, men believed all dwarves were male and all were of this ilk: stoic and proud warriors. Axe-wielding and plate-wearing. Stout bearded battle- hungry dwarves who would push them, time and time again, back up out of their mines and tunnels with ferocity. It just goes to show how little men know about the elder races. These folk are merely a vanguard, and they bravely do their duty to protect the riches of the Dwarven realm. Earn their trust and you’ve an ally for life. Earn their ire and you’re not likely to regret it very long. Instinct: To defend
- Drive them back
- Call up reinforcements

Fire Beetle 
Horde, Small
Flames (d6 penetrating damage) Near
3 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Full of flames
_Scarabaeus pyractomena_! What a delightful creature—see how its carapace glitters in the light of our torches? Not too close now, they’re temperamental, you see. The fire in their belly isn’t just metaphorical, no. Watch as I goad the beast. Aha! A spout of flame! Unexpected, isn’t it? One of these creatures alone, if it comes up from below, can be a hellish nuisance to a farmstead or village. A whole swarm? There’s a reason they call it a conflagration of fire beetles. _Instinct_: To enflame
- Undermine the ground
- Burst from the earth
- Spray forth flames

Gargoyle 
Horde, Stealthy, Hoarder
Claw (d6 damage) Close
3 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Wings
It’s a sad thing, really. Guardians bred by magi of the past with no more castles to guard. Their ancestors’ sacred task bred into their blood leads them to find a place—ruins mostly, but sometimes a cave or hill or mountain cliff—and guard it as though their masters yet lived below. They’re notoriously good at finding valuables buried below the earth, though. Find one of these winged reptiles and you’ll find yourself a treasure nearby. Just be careful, they’re hard to spot and tend to move in packs. _Instinct_: To guard
- Attack with the element of surprise
- Take to the air
- Blend into stonework

Gelatinous Cube 
Solitary, Large, Stealthy, Amorphous
Engulf (d10+1 damage ignores armor) Hand
20 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Transparent
How many adventurers’ last thoughts were “strange, this tunnel seems cleaner than most?” Too many, and all because of this transparent menace. A great acidic blob that expands to fill a small chamber or corridor and then slides, ever so slowly along, eating everything in its path. It cannot eat stone or metal and will often have them floating in its jelly mass. Blech. _Instinct_: To clean
- Fill an apparently empty space
- Dissolve

Goblin 
Horde, Small, Intelligent, Organized
Spear (d6 damage) Close, Reach
3 HP 1 Armor
Nobody seems to know where these things came from. Elves say they’re the dwarves’ fault—dredged up from a hidden place beneath the earth. Dwarves say they’re bad elvish children, taken away at birth and raised in the dark. The truth of the matter is that goblins have always been here and they’ll be here once all the civilized races have fallen and gone away. Goblins never die out. There’s just too damn many of them. _Instinct_: To multiply
- Charge!
- Call more goblins
- Retreat and return with (many) more

Goblin Orkaster 
Solitary, Small, Magical, Intelligent, Organized
Acid orb (d10+1 damage ignores armor) Near, Far
12 HP 0 Armor
Oh lord, who taught them magic? _Instinct_: To tap power beyond their stature
- Unleash a poorly understood spell
- Pour forth magical chaos
- Use other goblins for shields

Goliath 
Group, Huge, Organized, Intelligent
Mace (d8+7 damage) Reach, Forceful
14 HP 1 Armor
They dwell beneath the earth because they do not belong above it any longer. An undying race of mighty titans fled the plains and mountains in ages past—driven out by men and their heroes. Left to bide their time in the dark, hate and anger warmed by the pools of lava deep below. It’s said that an earthquake is a goliath’s birthing cry. Someday they’ll take back what’s theirs. _Instinct_: To retake
- Shake the earth
- Retreat, only to come back stronger

Otyugh 
Solitary, Large
Tentacles (d10+3 damage) Close, Reach, Forceful
20 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Filth Fever
The mating call of the otyugh is a horrible, blaring cry that sounds like a cross between an elephant dying and an over-eager vulture. The otyugh spends much of its time partly submerged in filthy water and prefers eating garbage over any other food. As a result, it often grows fat and strong on the offal of orcs, goblins and other cave-dwelling sub-humans. Get too close, however, and you’ll have one of its barbed tentacles dragging you into that soggy, razor-toothed maw. If you get away with your life, best get to a doctor, or your victory may be short lived. _Instinct_: To befoul
- Infect someone with filth fever
- Fling someone or something

Maggot-Squid 
Horde, Small
Chew (d6 damage) Close
3 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Amphibious, Paralyzing Tentacles
The gods that made this thing were playing some sick joke on the civilized folk of the world. The maggot-squid wields a face full of horrible squirming tentacles that, if they touch you, feel like being struck by lightning. They’ll paralyze you and chew you up slowly while you’re helpless. Best to not let it get to that. _Instinct_: To eat
- Paralyze with a touch

Purple Worm 
Solitary, Huge
Bite (d10+5 damage) Reach, Forceful
20 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Burrowing
Iä! Iä! The Purple Worm! Blessed is its holy slime! We walk, unworthy, in its miles of massive tunnels. We are but shadows under its violet and all- consuming glory. Mere acolytes, we who hope someday to return to the great embrace of its tooth-ringed maw. Let it consume us! Let it eat our homes and villages so that we might be taken! Iä! Iä! The Purple Worm! _Instinct_: To consume
- Swallow whole
- Tunnel through earth and stone

Roper 
Solitary, Large, Stealthy, Intelligent
Bite (d10+1 damage) Close, Reach
16 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Rock-like Flesh
Evolutionary happenstance has created a clever underground predator. Disguised as a rocky formation—most often a stalactite or stalagmite—the roper waits for its prey to wander by. When it does, whether it’s a rat, a goblin or a foolhardy adventurer, a mass of thin, whipping tentacles erupts from the thing’s hide. A hundred lashes in the blink of an eye and the stunned prey is being dragged into the roper’s mouth. Surprisingly effective for a thing that looks like a rock. Instinct: To ambush
- Ensnare the unsuspecting
- Disarm a foe
- Chew on someone

Rot Grub 
Horde, Tiny
Burrow (d6-2 damage) Hand
3 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Burrow into flesh
They live in your skin. Or your organ meat. Or your eyeballs. They grow there and then, in a bloody and horrific display, burrow their way out. Disgusting. Instinct: To infect
- Burrow under flesh
- Lay eggs
- Burst forth from an infected creature

Spiderlord 
Solitary, Large, Devious, Intelligent
Mandibles (d8+4 damage) Close, Reach
16 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Burrowing
Even spiders have their gods, whispered to in webs with little praying arms. Instinct: To weave webs (literal and metaphorical)
- Enmesh in webbing
- Put a plot into motion

Troglodyte 
Group, Organized
Club (d8 damage) Close
10 HP 1 Armor
Long-forgotten, our last remaining ancestors dwell in caves in the wild parts of the world. Driven away by our cities and villages, our iron swords and our fire, these ape-men eat their meat raw with sharp-nailed hands and jagged teeth. They strike out at frontier villages wielding clubs and in overwhelming numbers to seize cattle, tools, and poor prisoners to drag into the hills. Known for their viciousness and their stink, they’re an old and dying race we’d all sooner forget existed. Instinct: To prey on civilization
- Raid and retreat
- Use scavenged weapons or magic

### Denizens of the Swamp
All things give way to rot in the end. Food spoils on the table, men’s minds go mad with age and disease. Even the world itself, when left untended and uncared for, can turn to black muck and stinking air. Things dwell in these parts of Dungeon World. Things gone just as a bad as the swirling filth that fills the swamps. In these cesspit lowlands, adventurers will find such creatures as the deadly-eyed basilisk or the famed, unkillable troll. You’ll need more than a dry pair of boots to survive these putrid fens. A sword would be a good start.

Bakunawa 
Solitary, Large, Intelligent, Messy, Forceful
Bite (d10+3 damage, 1 piercing) Close, Reach
16 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Amphibious
Dragon-Turtle’s sister is a mighty serpent queen. Ten yards of scales and muscle, they say she wakes with a hunger when the sun disappears from the sky. She is attracted by bright light in the darkness and like any snake, the Bakunawa is sneaky. She will seek first to beguile and mislead and will only strike out with violence when no other option is available. When she does, though, her jaws are strong enough to crack the hull of any swamp-boat and certainly enough to slice through a steel breastplate or two. Give the greedy snake your treasures and she might just leave you alone. 
_Instinct_: To devour
- Lure prey with lies and illusions
- Lash out at light
- Devour

Basilisk 
Solitary, Hoarder
Bite (d10 damage) Close
12 HP 2 Armor
“Few have seen a basilisk and lived to tell the tale. Get it? Seen a basilisk? Little bit of basilisk humor there. Sorry, I know you’re looking for something helpful, sirs. Serious stuff, I understand. The basilisk, even without its ability to turn your flesh to stone with a gaze, is a dangerous creature. A bit like a frog, bulbous eyes and six muscled legs built for leaping. A bit like an alligator, with snapping jaws and sawing teeth. Covered in stony scales and very hard to kill. Best avoided, if possible.” _Instinct_: To create new statuary
- Turn flesh to stone with a gaze
- Retreat into a maze of stone

Black Pudding 
Solitary, Amorphous
Corrosive touch (d10 damage, ignores armor) Close
15 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Amorphous
How do you kill a pile of goo? A great, squishy pile of goo that also happens to want to dissolve you and slurp you up? That is a good question to which I have no answer. Do let us know when you find out. _Instinct_: To dissolve
- Eat away metal, flesh, or wood
- Ooze into a troubling place: food, armor, stomach

Crocodilian 
Group, Large
Bite (d8+3 damage) Close, Reach
10 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Amphibious, Camouflage
It’s a really, really big crocodile. Seriously. So big. _Instinct_: To eat
- Attack an unsuspecting victim
- Escape into the water
- Hold something tight in its jaws

Doppelgänger 
Solitary, Devious, Intelligent
Dagger (d6 damage) Close
12 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Shapeshifting
Their natural form, if you ever see it, is hideous. Like a creature who stopped growing part-way, before it decided it was elf or man or dwarf. Then again, maybe that’s how you get to be the way a doppelgänger is—without form, without shape to call their own, maybe all they really seek is a place to fit in. If you go out into the world, when you come back home, make sure your friends are who you think they are. They might, instead, be a doppelgänger and your friend might be dead at the bottom of a well somewhere. Then again, depending on your friends, that might be an improvement. _Instinct_: To infiltrate
- Assume the shape of a person whose flesh it’s tasted
- Use another’s identity to advantage
- Leave someone’s reputation shattered

Dragon Turtle 
Solitary, Huge, Cautious
Bite (d10+3 damage) Reach
20 HP 4 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Shell, Amphibious
Bakunawa has a brother. Where she is quick to anger and hungry for gold, he is slow and sturdy. She is a knife and he is a shield. A great turtle that lies in the muck and mire for ages as they pass, mud piled upon his back -- sometimes trees and shrubs. Sometimes a whole misguided clan of goblins will build their huts and cook their ratty meals on the shell of the dragon turtle. His snapping jaws may be glacier-slow, but they can rend a castle wall. Careful where you tread. 
_Instinct_: To resist change
- Move forward implacably
- Bring its full bulk to bear
- Destroy structures and buildings

Dragon Whelp 
Solitary, Small, Intelligent, Cautious, Hoarder
Elemental breath (d10+2 damage) Close, Near
16 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Wings, Elemental Blood
What? Did you think they were all a mile long? Did you think they didn’t come smaller than that? Sure, they may be no bigger than a dog and no smarter than an ape, but a dragon whelp can still belch up a hellish ball of fire that’ll melt your armor shut and drop you screaming into the mud. Their scales, too, are softer than those of their bigger kin, but can still turn aside an arrow or sword not perfectly aimed. Size is not the only measure of might. 
_Instinct_: To grow in power
- Start a lair, form a base of power
- Call on family ties
- Demand oaths of servitude

Ekek 
Horde
Talons (d6 damage) Close
3 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Wing-arms
Ugly, wrinkled bird-folk, these. Once, maybe, in some ancient past, they were a race of angelic men from on high, but now they eat rats that they fish from the murk with talon-feet and devour with needle-teeth. They understand the tongues of men and dwarves but speak in little more than gibbering tongues, mimicking the words they hear with mocking laughter. It’s a chilling thing to see a beast so close to man or bird but not quite either one. 
_Instinct_: To lash out
- Attack from the air
- Carry out the bidding of a more powerful creature

Fire Eels 
Horde, Tiny
Burning touch (d6-2 damage, ignores armor) Hand
3 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Flammable oil, aquatic
These strange creatures are no bigger or smarter than their mundane kin. They have the same vicious nature. Over their relations they have one advantage—an oily secretion that oozes from their skin. It makes them hard to catch. On top of that, with a twist of their body they can ignite the stuff, leaving pools of burning oil atop the surface of the water and roasting prey and predator alike. I hear the slimy things make good ingredients for fire-resistant gear, but you have to get your hands on one, first.
_Instinct_: To ignite
- Catch someone or something on fire (even underwater)
- Consume burning prey

Frogman 
Horde, Small, Intelligent
Spear (d6 damage) Close
7 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Amphibious
Croak croak croak. Little warty munchkins. Some wizard or godling’s idea of a bad joke, these creatures are. They stand as men, dress in scavenged cloth and hold court in their froggy villages. They speak a rumbling pidgin form of the tongue of man and are constantly at war with their neighbors. They’re greedy and stupid but clever enough when they need to defend themselves. Some say, too, their priests have a remarkable skill at healing. Or maybe they’re just really, really hard to kill. _Instinct_: To wage war
- Launch an amphibious assault
- Heal at a prodigious rate

Hydra 
Solitary, Large
Bite (d10+3 damage) Close, Reach
16 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Many heads, Only killed by a blow to the heart
A bit like a dragon, wingless though it may be. Heads, nine in number at birth, spring from a muscled trunk and weave a sinuous pattern in the air. A hydra is to be feared—a scaled terror of the marsh. The older ones, though, they have more heads, for every failed attempt to murder it just makes it stronger. Cut off a head and two more grow in its place. Only a strike, true and strong, to the heart can end a hydra’s life. Not time or tide or any other thing but this. _Instinct_: To grow
- Attack many enemies at once
- Regenerate a body part (especially a head)

Kobold 
Horde, Small, Stealthy, Intelligent, Organized
Spear (d6 damage) Close, Reach
3 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Dragon connection
Some are wont to lump these little, rat-like dragon-men in with goblins and orcs, bugbears and hobgoblins. They are smarter and wiser than their kin, however. The kobolds are beholden slaves to dragons and were, in ancient times, their lorekeepers and sorcerer-servants. Their clans, with names like Ironscale and Whitewing, form around a dragon master and live to serve and do its bidding. Spotting a kobold means more are near—and if more are near then a mighty dragon cannot be far, either. _Instinct_: To serve dragons
- Lay a trap
- Call on dragons or draconic allies
- Retreat and regroup

Lizardman 
Group, Stealthy, Intelligent, Organized
Spear (d8 damage) Close, Reach
6 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Amphibious
A traveling sorcerer once told me that lizardmen came before we did. That before elves and dwarves and men built even the first of their wattle huts, a race of proud lizard kings strode the land. That they lived in palaces of crystal and worshipped their own scaly gods. Maybe that’s true and maybe it ain’t—now they dwell in places men long forgot or abandoned, crafting tools from volcano-glass and lashing against the works of the civilized world. Maybe they just want back what they lost. _Instinct_: To destroy civilization
- Ambush the unsuspecting
- Launch an amphibious assault

Medusa 
Solitary, Devious, Intelligent, Hoarder
Claws (d6 damage) Close
12 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Look turns you to stone
The medusa are children of a serpent-haired mother, birthing them in ancient times to bear her name across the ages. They dwell near places of civilization—luring folks to their caves with promises of beauty or riches untold. Fine appreciators of art, the medusa curate strange collections of their victims, terror or ecstasy frozen forever in stone. It satisfies their vanity to know they were the last thing seen in so many lives. Arrogant, proud, and spiteful, in their way, they seek what so many do—endless company. _Instinct_: To collect
- Turn a body part to stone with a look
- Draw someone’s gaze
- Show hidden terrible beauty

Sahuagin 
Horde, Intelligent
Endless teeth (d6+4 damage, 1 piercing) Closer, Forceful, Messy
3 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities**: Amphibious
The shape and craft of men wedded to the hunger and the endless teeth of a shark. Voracious and filled only with hate, these creatures will not stop until all life has been consumed. They cannot be reasoned with, they cannot be controlled or sated. They are hunger and bloodlust, driven up from the depths of the sea to ravage coastal towns and swallow island villages. _Instinct_: To spill blood
- Bite off a limb
- Hurl a poisoned spear
- Frenzy at the sight of blood

Sauropod 
Group, Huge, Cautious
Trample (d10+5 damage) Reach
18 HP 4 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Armor plated body
Great lumbering beasts, they live in places long since forgotten by the thinking races of the world. Gentle if unprovoked, but mighty if their ire is raised, they trample smaller creatures with the care we might give to crushing an ant beneath our boots. If you see one, drift by and gaze in awe, but do not wake the giant. _Instinct_: To endure
- Stampede
- Knock something down
- Unleash a deafening bellow

Shambler 
Solitary, Large, Magical
Lash (d10+1 damage) Close, Reach, Forceful
23 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Swamp form
Some elementals are conjured up in sacred circles etched in chalk. Most, in fact. There’s a sort of science to it. Others, though, aren’t so orderly—they don’t fall under the carefully controlled assignments of fire, air, water, or earth. Some are a natural confluence of vine and mire and fungus. They do not think the way a man might think. They cannot be understood as one might understand an elf. They simply are. Spirits of the swamp. Shamblers in the mud. _Instinct_: To preserve and create swamps
- Call on the swamp itself for aid
- Meld into the swamp
- Reassemble into a new form

Troll 
Solitary, Large
Club (d10+3 damage) Close, Reach, Forceful
20 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Regeneration
Tall. Real tall. Eight or nine feet when they’re young or weak. Covered all over in warty, tough skin, too. Big teeth, stringy hair like swamp moss and long, dirty nails. Some are green, some gray, some black. They’re clannish and hateful of each other, not to mention all the rest of us. Near impossible to kill, too, unless you’ve fire or acid to spare—cut a limb off and watch. In a few days, you’ve got two trolls where you once had one. A real serious problem, as you can imagine. _Instinct_: To smash
- Undo the effects of an attack (unless caused by a weakness, your call)
- Hurl something or someone

Will-o-wisp 
Solitary, Tiny, Magical
Ray (w 2d8-2 damage) Near
12 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Body of light
Spot a lantern floating in the darkness, lost traveler in the swamp. Hope—a beacon of shimmering light. You call out to it, but there’s no answer. It begins to fade and so you follow, sloshing through the muck, tiring at the chase, hoping you’re being led to safety. Such a sad tale that always ends in doom. These creatures are a mystery—some say they’re ghosts, others beacons of faerie light. Nobody knows the truth. They are cruel, however. All can agree on that. Instinct: To misguide
- Lead someone astray
- Clear a path to the worst place possible

### Legions of the Undead
The sermons of mannish and dwarven gods would tell you that Death is the end of all. They say that once the mortal coil is unwound and a person takes their final breath that all is warmth and song and the white wings of angels. Not so. Not for all. For some, after life’s embrace loses its strength a darker power can take hold. Black magic rips the dead from the ground and gives them shambling unlife full of hate and hunger. Sorcery and witchcraft lend an ancient spell-smith the power to live forever in the husk of a Lich. There are bleak enchantments at play in shadowy corners all throughout Dungeon World. These creatures are the spawn of that fell magic.

Abomination 
Solitary, Large, Construct, Terrifying
Slam (d10+3 damage) Close, Reach, Forceful
20 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Many limbs, heads, and so on
Corpses sewn onto corpses make up the bulk of these shambling masses of dark magic. Most undead are crafted to be controlled—made to serve some purpose like building a tower or serving as guardians. Not so the abomination. The last aspect of the ritual used to grant fire to their hellish limbs invokes a hatred so severe that the abomination knows but one task: to tear and rend at the very thing it cannot have—life. Many students of the black arts learn to their mortal dismay the most important fact about these hulks; an abomination knows no master.
_Instinct_: To end life
- Tear flesh apart
- Spill forth putrid guts

Banshee 
Solitary, Magical, Intelligent
Scream (d10 damage) Near
16 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Insubstantial
Come away from an encounter with one of these vengeful spirits merely deaf and count yourself lucky for the rest of your peaceful, silent days. Often mistaken at first glance for a ghost or wandering spirit, the banshee reveals a far more deadly talent for sonic assault when angered. And her anger comes easy. A victim of betrayal (often by a loved one) the banshee makes known her displeasure with a roar or scream that can putrefy flesh and rend the senses. If you can help her get her vengeance, they say she might grant rewards. Whether the affection of a spurned spirit is a thing you’d want, well, that’s another question. 
_Instinct_: To get revenge
- Drown out all other sound with a ceaseless scream
- Unleash a skull-splitting noise
- Disappear into the mists

Devourer 
Solitary, Large, Intelligent, Hoarder
Smash (d10+3 damage) Close, Reach, Forceful
16 HP 1 Armor
Most folk know that the undead feed on flesh. The warmth, blood and living tissue continue their unholy existence. This is true for most of the mindless dead, animated by black sorcery. Not so the devourer. When a particularly wicked person (often a manipulator of men, an apostate priest or the like) dies in a gruesome way, the dark powers of Dungeon World might bring them back to a kind of life. The devourer, however, does not feed on the flesh of men or elves. The devourer eats souls. It kills with a pleasure only the sentient can enjoy and in the moments of its victims’ expiry, draws breath like a drowning man and swallows a soul. What does it mean to have your soul eaten by such a creature? None dare ask for fear of finding out. _Instinct_: To feast on souls
- Devour or trap dying soul
- Bargain for a soul’s return

Dragonbone 
Solitary, Huge
Bite (d10+3 damage, 3 piercing) Reach, Messy
20 HP 2 Armor
Mystical sorcerers debate: is this creature truly undead or is it a golem made of a particularly rare and blasphemous material? The bones, sinews and scales of a dead dragon make up this bleak automaton. Winged but flightless, dragon- shaped but without the mighty fire of such a noble thing, the dragonbone serves its master with a twisted devotion and is often set to assault the keeps and towers of rival necromancers. It would take a being of some considerable evil to twist the remains of a dragon thus. 
_Instinct_: To serve
- Attack unrelentingly

Draugr 
Horde, Organized
Rusty sword (d6+1 damage) Close, Reach
7 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Icy touch
In the Nordemark, the men and women tell tales in their wooden halls of a place where the noble dead go. A mead hall atop their heavenly mountain where men of valor go to await the final battle for the world. It is a goodly place. It is a place where one hopes to go after death. And the inglorious dead? Those who fall to poison or in an act of cowardice, warriors though they may be? Well, those mead halls aren’t open to all and sundry. Some come back, frozen and twisted and empowered by jealous rage and wage their eternal war not on the forces of giants or trolls but on the towns of the men they once knew. 
_Instinct_: To take from the living
- Freeze flesh
- Call on the unworthy dead

Ghost 
Solitary, Devious, Terrifying
Phantom touch (d6 damage) Close, Reach
16 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Insubstantial
Every culture tells the story the same way. You live, you love or you hate, you win or you lose, you die somehow you’re not too fond of and here you are, ghostly and full of disappointment and what have you. Some people take it upon themselves, brave and kindly folks, to seek out the dead and help them pass to their rightful rest. You can find them, most times, down at the tavern drinking away the terrors they’ve seen or babbling to themselves in the madhouse. Death takes a toll on the living, no matter how you come by it. 
_Instinct_: To haunt
- Reveal the terrifying nature of death
- Haunt a place of importance
- Offer information from the other side, at a price

Ghoul 
Group
Talons (d8 damage, 1 piercing) Close, Messy
10 HP 1 Armor
Hunger. Hunger hunger hunger. Desperate clinging void-stomach-emptiness hunger. Sharp talons to rend flesh and teeth to tear and crack bones and suck out the soft marrow inside. Vomit up hate and screaming jealous anger and charge on twisted legs—scare the living flesh and sweeten it ever more with the stink of fear. Feast. Peasant or knight, wizard, sage, prince, or priest all make for such delicious meat.
_Instinct_: To eat
- Gnaw off a body part
- Gain the memories of their meal

Lich 
Solitary, Magical, Intelligent, Cautious, Hoarder, Construct
Magical Force (d10+3 damage, ignores armor) Near, Far
16 HP 5 Armor
“At the end, they give you a scroll and a jeweled medallion to commemorate your achievements. Grand Master of Abjuration, I was called, then. Old man. Weak and wizened and just a bit too senile for them—those jealous halfwits. Barely apprentices, and they called themselves The New Council. It makes me sick, or would, if I still could be. They told me it was an honor and I would be remembered forever. It was like listening to my own eulogy. Fitting, in a way, don’t you think? It took me another ten years to learn the rituals and another four to collect the material and you see before you the fruits of my labor. I endure. I live. I will see the death of this age and the dawn of the next. It pains me to have to do this, but, you see, you cannot be permitted to endanger my research. When you meet Death, say hello for me, would you?” 
_Instinct_: To un-live
- Cast a perfected spell of death or destruction
- Set a ritual or great working into motion
- Reveal a preparation or plan already completed

Mummy 
Solitary, Divine, Hoarder
Smash (d10+2 damage) Close
16 HP 1 Armor
There are cultures who revere the dead. They do not bury them in the cold earth and mourn their passing. These people spend weeks preparing the sacred corpse for its eternal rest. Temples, pyramids, and great vaults of stone are built to house them and are populated with slaves, pets and gold. The better to live in luxury beyond the Black Gates, no? Do not be tempted by these vaults—oh, I know that greedy look! Heed my warnings or risk a terrible fate, for the honored dead do not wish to be disturbed. Thievery will only raise their ire—don’t say I did not warn you! 
_Instinct_: To enjoy eternal rest
- Curse them
- Wrap them up
- Rise again

Shadow 
Horde, Large, Magical, Construct
Shadow touch (d6+1 damage) Close, Reach
11 HP 4 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Shadow Form
We call to the elements. We call on fire, ever-burning. We summon water, life- giving. We beseech the earth, stable-standing. We cry to the air, forever- changing. These elements we recognize and give our thanks but ask to pass. The elemental we call upon this night knows another name. We call upon the element of Night. Shadow, we name you. Death’s messenger and black assassin, we claim for our own. Accept our sacrifice and do our bidding ’til the morning come. 
_Instinct_: To darken
- Snuff out light
- Spawn another shadow from the dead

Skeleton 
Horde
Slam (d6 damage) Close
7 HP 1 Armor
Dem bones, dem bones, dem dry bones.
_Instinct_: To take the semblance of life
- Act out what it did in life
- Snuff out the warmth of life
- Reconstruct from miscellaneous bones

Spectre 
Solitary, Hoarder
Withering touch (d10 damage) Close
12 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Insubstantial
For some folk, when they pass, Death himself cannot release their grip on the places they love most. A priest whose devotion to the temple is greater than that of his god. A banking guild official who cannot bear to part with his vault. A drunk and his favorite tavern. All make excellent spectres. They act not out of the usual hunger that drives the undead, but jealousy. Jealousy that anyone else might come to love their home as much as they do and drive them out. These places belong to them and these invisible spirits will kill before they’ll let anyone send them to their rest. _Instinct_: To drive life from a place
- Turn their haunt against a creature
- Bring the environment to life

Vampire 
Group, Stealthy, Organized, Intelligent
Supernatural force (d8+5 damage, 1 piercing) Close, Forceful
10 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Changing form, ancient mind
We fear them, because they call to us. So much like us, or how we hope to be: beautiful, passionate, and powerful. They are drawn to us for what they cannot be: warm, kind, and alive. These tormented souls can only hope, at most, to pass their dreadful curse along. Every time they feed they run the risk of passing along their torture to another and in each one lives the twisted seed of its creator. Vampires beget vampires. Suffering begets suffering. Do not be drawn in by their seduction or you may be given their gift—a crown of shadows and the chains of eternal undying grief. 
_Instinct_: To manipulate
- Charm someone
- Feed on their blood
- Retreat to plan again

Zombie 
Horde
Bite (d6 damage) Close
11 HP 1 Armor
When there’s no more room in Hell… 
_Instinct_: Braaaaaains
- Attack with overwhelming numbers
- Corner them
- Gain strength from the dead, spawn more zombies

### The Dark Woods
It would not be a lie to say that there are trees that stand in the deepest groves of Dungeon World that have stood since before man or elf walked amidst their roots. It would be true, too, to say that these ancient trees have long lost the green leaves of spring. In the strands of the dark woods one finds, if one looks in the right place, sylvan monsters old and powerful. Here live the race of savage centaurs and the fey soul-stealing creatures of yore. Under the shadow of the ancient trees, wolf-men howl for blood. Hurry along the old forest road and light no fire for food or warmth for it’s said that flames offend the woods themselves. You wouldn’t want that, would you?

Assassin Vine 
Solitary, Stealthy, Amorphous
Thorns (d10 damage, 1 piercing) Close, Reach, Messy
15 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Plant
Among the animals there exists a clear division ‘tween hunter and hunted. All it takes is a glance to know—by fangs and glowing eyes or claws or venomous sting—which of the creatures of this world are meant to kill and which stand to be killed. Such a split, if you have the eyes to see it, cuts the world of leaves and flowers in twain, as well. Druids in their forest circles know it. Rangers, too, might spot such a plant before it’s too late. Lay folk, though, they wander where they oughtn’t—paths into the deep woods covered in creeping vines and with a snap, these hungry ropes snap tight, dragging their meaty prey into the underbrush. Mind your feet, traveller. 
_Instinct_: To grow
- Shoot forth new growth
- Attack the unwary

Chaos Ooze 
Solitary, Planar, Terrifying, Amorphous
Warping touch (d10 damage ignores armor) Close
23 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Ooze, Fragments of other planes embedded in it
The barrier between Dungeon World and the elemental planes is not, as you might hope, a wall of stone. It’s much more porous. Places where the civil races do not often tread can sometimes, how to put this, spring a leak. Like a dam come just a little loose. Bits and pieces of the chaos spill out. Sometimes, they’ll congeal like an egg on a pan—that’s where we get the material for many of the Guild’s magical trinkets. Useful, right? Sometimes, though, it squirms and squishes around a bit and stays that way, warping all it touches into some other, strange form. Chaos begets chaos, and it grows. 
_Instinct_: To change
- Cause a change in appearance or substance
- Briefly bridge the planes

Cockatrice 
Group, Small, Hoarder
Beak (d8 damage) Close
6 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Stone touch
“I ain’t ever seen such a thing, sir. Rodrick thought it a chicken, maybe. Poor Rodrick. I figured it to be a lizard of a sort, though he was right—it had a beak and gray feathers like a chicken. Right, well, see, we found it in the woods, in a nest at the foot of a tree while we were out with the sow. Looking for mushrooms, sir. I told Rodrick we were—yes, sir, right sir, the bird—see, it was glaring at Rodrick and he tried to scare it off with a stick to steal the eggs but the thing pecked his hand. Quick it was, too. I tried to get him away but he just got slower and slower and…yes, as you see him now, sir. All frozen up like when we left the dog out overnight in winter two years back. Poor, stupid Rodrick. Weren’t no bird nor lizard, were it, sir?”
_Instinct_: To defend the nest
- Start a slow transformation to stone

Elvish Warrior 
Horde, Intelligent, Organized
Sword (b 2d6 damage) Close
3 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Sharp sense
”As with all things they undertake, the elves approach war as an art. I saw them fight, once. The Battle of Astrid’s Veil. Yes, I am that old, boy, now hush. A warrior-maiden, she was clad in plate that shone like the winter sky. White hair streaming and a pennant of ocean blue tied to her spear. She seemed to glide between the trees the way an angel might, striking out and bathing her blade in blood that steamed in the cold air. I never felt so small before. I trained with the master-at-arms of Battlemoore, you know. I’ve held a sword longer than you’ve been alive, boy, and in that one moment I knew that my skill meant nothing. Thank the gods the elves were with us then. A more beautiful and terrible thing I have never seen.” 
_Instinct_: To seek perfection
- Strike at a weak point
- Set ancient plans in motion
- Use the woods to advantage

Elvish High Arcanist 
Solitary, Magical, Intelligent, Organized
Arcane fire (d10 damage ignores armor) Near, Far
12 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Sharp senses
True elvish magic isn’t like the spells of men. Mannish wizardry is all rotes and formulas. They cheat to find the arcane secrets that resound all around them. They are deaf to the arcane symphony that sings in the woods. Elvish magic requires a fine ear to hear that symphony and the voice with which to sing. To harmonize with what is already resounding. Men bind the forces of magic to their will; Elves simply pluck the strings and hum along. The High Arcanists, in a way, have become more and less than any elf. The beat of their blood is the throbbing of all magic in this world. 
_Instinct_: To unleash power
- Work the magic that nature demands
- Cast forth the elements

Giant 
Group, Huge, Intelligent, Organized
Thrown rocks (d8+3 damage) Reach, Near, Far, Forceful
10 HP 1 Armor
Ever seen an ogre before? Bigger than that. Dumber and meaner, too. Hope you like having cows thrown at you. 
_Instinct_: Ruin everything.
- Throw something
- Do something stupid
- Shake the earth

Ogre 
Group, Large, Intelligent
Club (d8+5 damage) Close, Reach, Forceful
10 HP 1 Armor
Somewhere in the not-so-long history of the mannish race there was a divide. In days when men were merely dwellers-in-the-mud with no magic to call their own, they split in two: one camp left their caves and the dark forests and built the first city to honor the gods. The others, a wild and savage lot, retreated into darkness. They grew, there. In the deep woods a grim loathing for their softer kin gave them strength. They found dark gods of their own, there in the woods and hills. Ages passed and they bred tall and strong and full of hate. We have forged steel and they match it with their savagery. We may have forgotten our common roots, but somewhere, deep down, the ogres remember. 
_Instinct_: To return the world to darker days
- Destroy something
- Fly into a rage
- Take something by force

Nightrazor
Solitary
Tusks (d10 damage, 3 piercing) Close, Messy
16 HP 1 Armor
The tusks of the nightrazor shred metal plate like so much tissue. Voracious, savage and unstoppable. To kill one? A greater trophy of bravery and skill is hard to name, though I hear a nightrazor killed the Drunkard King in a single thrust. You think you’re a better hunter than he? 
_Instinct_: To shred
- Rip them apart
- Rend armor and weapons

Sprite 
Horde, Tiny, Stealthy, Magical, Devious, Intelligent

Dagger (w 2d4 damage) Hand
3 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Wings, Fey Magic
I’d classify them elementals, except that “being annoying” isn’t an element.
_Instinct_: To play tricks
- Play a trick to expose someone’s true nature
- Confuse their senses
- Craft an illusion

Treant 
Group, Huge, Intelligent, Amorphous
Walloping branches (d10+5 damage) Reach, Forceful
21 HP 4 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Wooden
Old and tall and thick of bark walk amidst the tree-lined dark 
Strong and slow and forest-born, treants anger quick, we warn if to woods with axe ye go know the treants be thy foe
_Instinct_: To protect nature
- Move with implacable strength
- Set down roots
- Spread old magic

Werewolf 
Solitary, Intelligent
Bite (d10+2 damage, 1 piercing) Close, Messy
12 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Weak to silver
“Beautiful, isn’t it? The moon, I mean. She’s watching us, you know? Her pretty silver eyes watch us while we sleep. Mad, too—like all the most beautiful ones. If she were a woman, I’d bend my knee and make her my wife on the spot. No, I didn’t ask you here to speak about her, though. The chains? For your safety, not mine. I’m cursed, you see. You must have suspected. The sorcerer-kings called it “lycanthropy” in their day—passed on by a bite to make more of our kind. No, I could find no cure. Please, don’t be scared. You have the arrows I gave you? Silver, yes. Ah, you begin to understand. Don’t cry, sister. You must do this for me. I cannot bear more blood on my hands. You must end this. For me.” 
_Instinct_: To shed the appearance of civilization
- Transform to pass unnoticed as beast or man
- Strike from within
- Hunt like man and beast

Worg 
Horde, Organized
Bite (d6 damage) Close
3 HP 1 Armor
As horses are to the civil races, so go the worg to the goblins. Mounts, fierce in battle, ridden by only the bravest and most dangerous, are found and bred in the forest primeval to serve the goblins in their wars on men. The only safe worg is a pup, separated from its mother. If you can find one of these, or make orphans of a litter with a sharp sword, you’ve got what could become a loyal protector or hunting hound in time. Train it well, mind you, for the worg are smart and never quite free of their primal urges.
_Instinct_: To serve
- Carry a rider into battle
- Give its rider an advantage

### Ravenous Hordes
“I’ve bested an orc in single combat,” they crow. “I’ve fought a gnoll and lived to the tell the tale.” Which is no small feat and yet, you know the truth of these boasts. Like vermin, spotting but one of these creatures speaks to a greater doom on the horizon. No orc travels alone. No slavering gnoll moves without his pack. You know that soon, the wardrums will sound and the walls will be besieged by the full fury of the warchief and his tusked berserkers. These are the monsters that will bring civilization, screaming and weeping, to its knees. Unless you can stop them. Best of luck.

Ankheg 
Group, Medium
Bite (d8+1 damage) Close, Reach
10 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Burrowing
A hide like plate armor and great crushing mandibles are problematic. A stomach full of acid that can burn a hole through a stone wall makes them all the worse. They’d be bad enough if they were proper insect-sized, but these things have the gall to be as long as any given pony. It’s just not natural! Good thing they tend to stick to one place? Easy for you to say -- you don’t have ankhegs living under your corn field. 
_Instinct_: To undermine
- Undermine the ground
- Burst from the earth
- Spray forth acid, eating away at metal and flesh

Ankheg Queen 
Solitary, Huge, Organized, Intelligent, Hoarder
Crushing mandibles (d10+5 damage) Reach, Forceful
24 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Hive connection, Insectoid
At the heart of every hive, no matter its size or kind, lives a queen. As large as any giant, she sits protected by her guard, served by everyone for a singular purpose: to spread her kind and grow the hive. To birth the eggs. To nurture. We do not understand the minds of these creatures but it is known they can communicate with their children, somehow, over vast distances and that they begin to teach them the ways of earth and stone and war while still pale and wriggling larvae, without a word. To kill one is to declare ceaseless war, as they scour the surrounding lands until all is eaten or they die trying. 
_Instinct_: To spread ankhegs
- Call every ankheg it spawned
- Release a half-formed larval mutation
- Organize and issue orders

Beastman Tracker 
Group, Organized, Intelligent
Bow (d8 damage) Near, Far
6 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Scent-tracker
Once they scent your blood, you can’t escape. Not without intervention from the gods, or the duke’s rangers at least. The desert scrub is a dangerous place to go exploring on your own and if you fall and break your leg or eat the wrong cactus, well, you’ll be lucky if you die of thirst before the gnolls find you. They prefer their prey alive, see—cracking bones and the screams of the dying lend a sort of succulence to a meal. Sickening creatures, no? They’ll hunt you, slow and steady, as you die. If you hear laughter in the desert wind, well, best pray Death comes to take you before they do. 
_Instinct_: To prey on weakness
- Doggedly track prey
- Strike at a moment of weakness

Beastman Emissary 
Solitary, Divine, Intelligent, Organized
Ceremonial dagger (d10+2 damage) Close, Reach
18 HP 1 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Scent
Oh, an emissary! How nice. I suspect you didn’t know the gnolls had ambassadors, did you? Yes, even these mangy hyenas have to make nice sometimes. No, no, not with us. Nor the dwarves, neither. No, the emissary is the one, among his packmates, who trucks directly with their dripping demon lord. Frightening? Too right. Every hound has a master with his hand on the chain. This gnoll hears his master’s voice. Hears it and obeys. 
_Instinct_: To share divine insight
- Pass on demonic influence
- Drive the pack into a fervor

Beastman Alpha 
Solitary, Intelligent, Organized
Sword (b 2d10 damage, 1 piercing) Close
12 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Scent
Every pack has its top dog. Bigger, maybe—that’d be the simplest way. Often, though, with these lank and filthy mutts, it’s not about size or sharp teeth but about cruelty. About a willingness to kill your brothers and eat them while the pack watches. Willingness to desecrate the pack in a way that cows them to you. If they’re that awful to each other—to their living kin—think about how they must view us. It’s hard to be mere meat in a land of carnivores. 
_Instinct_: To drive the pack
- Demand obedience
- Send the pack to hunt

Beastman Warchief 
Solitary, Intelligent, Organized
Iron Sword of Ages (b 2d10+2 damage) Close, Reach
16 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** One-Eye blessings, Shaman blessings, Divine protection from mortal harm
There are chiefs and there are leaders of the tribes among the orcs. There are those who rise to seize power and fall under the machinations of their foes. There is but one Warchief. One orc in all the horde who stands above the rest, bearing the blessings of the One-Eyes and the Shamans both. But one who walks with the elements under Night. But one who bears the Iron Sword of Ages and carries the ancient grudge against the civil races on his shoulders. The Warchief is to be respected, to be obeyed and above all else, to be feared. All glory to the Warchief. 
_Instinct_: To lead
- Start a war
- Make a show of power
- Enrage the tribes

### Twisted Experiments
For some who learn the arcane arts it’s not merely enough to be able to live for a thousand years or throw lightning bolts that can fry a man. Some aren’t quite satisfied with the power to speak to the dead or draw the angels down from heaven. Hubris calls on those cloaked-and-hooded “scientists” to make a strange and unholy life of their own. No mortal children, these. These are the brood of a mind gone foul with strange magic. In this setting you will find such nightmares as the chimera, dripping poison. Here, too, are the protector golems and mutant apes. All sorts of bad ideas await you in the fallen towers of the mad magicians of Dungeon World.

Chimera 
Solitary, Large, Construct
Bite (d10+1 damage) Reach
16 HP 1 Armor
Well-known and categorized, the chimera is a perfected creature. From the codices of the Mage’s Guild to the famous pages of Cullaina’s Creature Compendium, there’s no confusion about what chimera means. Two parts lioness, one part serpent, head of a she-goat, and all the vicious magic one can muster. The actual ritual might vary, as might a detail or two—more creative sorcerers switch the flame breath for acid, perhaps. Used as a guardian, an assassin or merely an instrument of chaos unchained, it matters little. The chimera is the worst sort of abomination: an intentional affront to all natural life. 
_Instinct_: To do as commanded
- Belch forth flame
- Run them over
- Poison them

Derro 
Horde, Devious, Intelligent, Organized
Pickaxe (d6 damage) Close
3 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Telepathy
It’s typical to think that all the malignant arcane monsters made in this world are birthed by wizards, sorcerers, and their ilk. That the colleges and towers of Dungeon World are womb to every bleak experiment. There are mistakes made in the depths of the earth, too. These ones, the derro, are the mistakes of a long-forgotten dwarven alchemist. The derro don’t forget, though. Twisted and hateful, the derro can be spotted by their swollen skulls, brain-matter grown too large. They do not speak except in thoughts to one another and plot in the silent dark to extract sweetest revenge—that of the created on the creator. 
_Instinct_: To replace dwarves
- Fill a mind with foreign thoughts
- Take control of a beast’s mind

Flesh Golem 
Horde
Miscellaneous Claws and Teeth (d6+2 damage) Close, Forceful
3 HP 0 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Many body parts
Stolen bits and pieces in the night. Graveyards stealthily uprooted and maybe tonight an arm, a leg, another head (the last one came apart too soon). Even the humblest hedge-enchanter can make do with what he can and, with a little creativity, well—it’s not only the college that can make life, hmm? We’ll show them.
_Instinct_: To live
- Follow orders
- Detach a body part

Kraken 
Solitary, Huge
Giant tentacles (d10+5 damage) Reach, Forceful
20 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Aquatic
”A cephalo-what? No, boy. Not “a kraken” but “the kraken.” I don’t know what nonsense they taught you at that school you say you’re from, but here, we know to respect the Hungerer. Right, that’s what we call it, The Hungerer in the Deep to be more proper. Ain’t no god, though we’ve got those, too. It’s a squid! A mighty squid with tentacles thicker ‘round than a barrel and eyes the size of the full moon. Smart, too, the Hungerer. Knows just when to strike—when you’re all too drunk or too tired or run out of clean water, that’s when he gets you. No, I ain’t ever seen him. I’m alive, aren’t I?” 
_Instinct_: To rule the ocean
- Drag a person or ship to a watery grave
- Wrap them in tentacles

Manticore 
Solitary, Large, Construct
Stinger (d10+1 damage, 1 piercing) Close, Reach, Messy
16 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Wings
If the chimera is the first step down a dark path, the manticore is a door that can’t be closed once it’s been opened. A lion, a scorpion, the wings of a drake. All difficult to obtain but not impossible and just animals, anyway. The last component, the hissing hateful face of the beast, is the ingredient that makes a manticore so cruel. Young or old, man or woman, it matters not but that they are human, living and breathing, married to the creature with twisted magic. All sense of who they are is lost, and maybe that’s a blessing, but the beast is born from human suffering. No wonder, then, that they’re all so eager to kill. 
_Instinct_: To kill
- Poison them
- Rip something apart

Rust Monster 
Group, Construct
Corrosive touch (d8 damage, ignores armor) Close
6 HP 3 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Corrosive touch
A very distinctive-looking creature. Something like a reddish cricket, I think. Long crickety legs, anyhow. Blind, too, as I understand it—they feel their way around with those long moth-looking tendrils. Feed that way, too. Sift through piles of metal for the choicest bits. That’s what they eat, don’t matter the type, neither. Their merest touch turns it all to rusted flakes. Magic lasts longer but under the scrutiny of a rust monster, it’s a foregone conclusion. Only the gods know where they came from, but they’re a curse if you value your belongings. 
_Instinct_: To decay
- Turn metal to rust
- Gain strength from consuming metal

Xorn 
Solitary, Large, Construct
Maw (d10 damage) Close, Reach
12 HP 2 Armor
**Special Qualities:** Burrowing
Dwarf-made elemental garbage muncher. Shaped like a trash bin with a radius of arms to feed excess rock and stone into its gaping maw. They eat stone and excrete light and heat. Perfect for operating a mine or digging out a quarry. Once one gets lost in the sewers below a city, though, or in the foundation of a castle? You’re in deep trouble. They’ll eat and eat until you’ve got nothing left but to collapse the place down on it and move somewhere else. Ask Burrin, Son of Fjornnvald, exile from his clan. I bet he could tell you a story about a xorn.
_Instinct_: To eat
- Consume stone
- Give off a burst of light and heat

### The Lower Depths
Ruins dot the countryside of Dungeon World. Old bastions of long-forgotten civilization fallen to decay, to monsters, or to the whim of a vengeful god. These ruins often cover a much more dangerous truth—catacombs and underground complexes lousy with traps and monsters. Gold, too. Which is why you’re here. Why you’re locked in mortal combat with a tribe of spiteful dark elves. Battling stone giants in caverns the size of whole countries. Maybe, though, you’re the noble souls who’ve travelled to the world’s heart to put an end to the Apocalypse Dragon—the beast who, it is said, will one day swallow the sun and kill us all. We appreciate it, really. We’ll all pray for you.

Aboleth Group, Huge, Intelligent

Tentacle (d10+3 damage) 18 HP 0 Armor

Reach

**Special Qualities:** Telepathy

Deep below the surface of the world, in freshwater seas untouched by the sun, dwell the aboleth. Fish the size of whales, with strange growths of gelatinous feelers used to probe the lightless shores. They’re served by slaves: blind albino victims of any race unfortunate enough to stumble on them, drained of thought and life by the powers of the aboleth’s alien mind. In the depths they plot against each other, fishy cultists building and digging upward towards the surface until someday, they’ll breach it. For now, they sleep and dream and guide their pallid minions to do their bidding. _Instinct_: To command

-   Invade a mind
-   Turn minions on them
-   Put a plan in motion

Apocalypse Dragon Solitary, Huge, Magical, Divine

Bite (b[2d12]+9 damage, 4 piercing) 26 HP 5 Armor

Reach, Forceful, Messy

**Special Qualities:** Inch-thick metal hide, Supernatural knowledge, Wings

The end of all things shall be a burning—of tree and earth and of the air itself. It shall come upon the plains and mountains not from beyond this world but from within it. Birthed from the womb of deepest earth shall come the Dragon that Will End the World. In its passing all will become ash and bile and the Dungeon World a dying thing will drift through planar space devoid of life. They say to worship the Apocalypse Dragon is to invite madness. They say to love it is to know oblivion. The awakening is coming. _Instinct_: To end the world

-   Set a disaster in motion
-   Breathe forth the elements
-   Act with perfect foresight

Chaos Spawn Solitary, Amorphous

Chaotic touch (d10 damage) 19 HP 1 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Chaos form

Driven from the city, a cultist finds sanctuary in towns and villages. Discovered there, he flees to the hills and scratches his devotion on the cave walls. Found out again, he is chased with knife and torch into the depths, crawling deeper and deeper until, in the deepest places, he loses his way. First, he forgets his name. Then he forgets his shape. His chaos gods, most beloved, bless him with a new one. _Instinct_: To undermine the established order

-   Rewrite reality
-   Unleash chaos from containment

Chuul Group, Large, Cautious

Claws (d8+1 damage, 3 piercing) 10 HP 4 Armor

Close, Reach, Messy

**Special Qualities:** Amphibious

Your worst seafood nightmare come to life. A vicious sort of half-man half- crawdad, cursed with primal intelligence and blessed with a pair of razor- sharp claws. Strange things lurk in the stinking pools in caverns best forgotten and the chuul is one of them. If you spot one, your best hope is a heavy mace to crack its shell and maybe a little garlic butter. Mmmm. _Instinct_: To split

-   Split something in two with mighty claws
-   Retreat into water

Deep Elf Assassin Group, Intelligent, Organized

Poisoned blade (d8 damage, 1 piercing) 6 HP 1 Armor

Close

It was not so simple a thing as a war over religion or territory. No disagreement of queens led to the great sundering of the elves. It was sadness. It was the very diminishing of the world by the lesser races. The glory of all the elves had built was cracking and turning to glass. Some, then, chose to separate themselves from the world; wracked with tears they turned their backs on men and dwarves. There were others, though, that were overcome with something new. A feeling no elf had felt before. Spite. Hatred filled these elves and twisted them and they turned on their weaker cousins. Some still remain after the great exodus below. Some hide amongst us with spider-poisoned blades, meting out that strangest of punishments: elven vengeance. _Instinct_: To spite the surface races

-   Poison them
-   Unleash an ancient spell
-   Call reinforcements

Deep Elf Swordmaster Group, Intelligent, Organized

Barbed blade (b[2d8]+2 damage, 1 piercing) 6 HP 2 Armor

Close

The deep elves lost the sweetness and gentle peace of their bright cousins ages ago, but they did not abandon grace. They move with a swiftness and beauty that would bring a tear to any warrior’s eye. In the dark, they’ve practiced. A cruelty has infested their swordsmanship—a wickedness comes to the fore. Barbed blades and whips replace the shining pennant-spears of elven battles on the surface. The swordmasters of the deep elf clans do not merely seek to kill, but to punish with every stroke of their blades. Wickedness and pain are their currency. _Instinct_: To punish unbelievers

-   Inflict pain beyond measure
-   Use the dark to advantage

Deep Elf Priest Solitary, Divine, Intelligent, Organized

Smite (d10+2 damage) 14 HP 0 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Divine connection

The spirits of the trees and the lady sunlight are far, far from home in the depths where the deep elves dwell. New gods were found there, waiting for their children to come home. Gods of the spiders, the fungal forests, and things that whisper in the forbidden caves. The deep elves, ever attuned to the world around them, listened with hateful intent to their new gods and found a new source of power. Hate calls to hate and grim alliances were made. Even among these spiteful ranks, piety finds a way to express itself. _Instinct_: To pass on divine vengeance

-   Weave spells of hatred and malice
-   Rally the deep elves
-   Pass on divine knowledge

Dragon Solitary, Huge, Terrifying, Cautious, Hoarder

Bite (b[2d12]+5 damage, 4 piercing) 16 HP 5 Armor

Reach, Messy

**Special Qualities:** Elemental blood, Wings

They are the greatest and most terrible things this world will ever have to offer. _Instinct_: To rule

-   Bend an element to its will
-   Demand tribute
-   Act with disdain

Gray Render Solitary, Large

Rending claws (d10+3 damage, 3 piercing) 16 HP 1 Armor

Gray Render Solitary, Large

Rending claws (d10+3 damage, 3 piercing) 16 HP 1 Armor

Close, Reach, Forceful

On its own, the render is a force of utter destruction. Huge and leathery, with a maw of unbreakable teeth and claws to match, the render seems to enjoy little more than tearing things apart. Stone, flesh, or steel, it matters little. However, the gray render is so rarely found alone. They bond with other creatures. Some at birth, others as fully-grown creatures, and a gray render will follow their bonded master wherever they go, bringing them offerings of meat and protecting them while they sleep. Finding an un-bonded render means certain riches, if you survive to sell it. _Instinct_: To serve

-   Tear something apart

Magmin Horde, Intelligent, Organized, Hoarder

Flaming hammer (d6+2 damage) 7 HP 4 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Fiery blood

Dwarf-shaped and industrious, the magmin are among the deepest-dwellers of Dungeon World. Found in cities of brass and obsidian built nearest the molten core of the planet, the magmin live a life devoted to craft—especially that of fire and magical items related to it. Surly and strange, they do not often deign to speak to petitioners who appear at their gates, even those who have somehow found a way to survive the hellish heat. Even so, they respect little more than a finely made item and to learn to forge from a magmin craftsman means unlocking secrets unknown to surface blacksmiths. Like so much else, visiting the magmin is a game of risk and reward. _Instinct_: To craft

-   Offer a trade or deal
-   Strike with fire or magic
-   Provide just the right item, at a price

Minotaur Solitary, Large

Axe (d10+1 damage) 16 HP 1 Armor

Close, Reach

**Special Qualities:** Unerring sense of direction

“Head of a man, body of a bull. No, wait, I’ve got that backwards. It’s the bull’s head and the man’s body. Hooves sometimes? Is that right? I remember the old king said something about a maze? Blast! You know I can’t think under this kind of pressure. What was that? Oh gods, I think it’s coming…” _Instinct_: To contain

-   Confuse them
-   Make them lost

Naga Solitary, Intelligent, Organized, Hoarder, Magical

Bite (d10 damage) 12 HP 2 Armor

Close, Reach

Ambitious and territorial above nearly all else, the naga are very rarely found without a well-formed and insidious cult of followers. You’ll see it in many mountain towns—a snake sigil scrawled on a tavern wall or a local church burned to the ground. People going missing in the mines. Men and women wearing the mark of the serpent. At the core of it all lies a naga: an old race now fallen into obscurity, still preening with the head of a man over its coiled, serpent body. Variations of these creatures exist depending on their bloodline and original purpose, but they are all master manipulators and magical forces to be reckoned with. _Instinct_: To lead

-   Send a follower to their death
-   Use old magic
-   Offer a deal or bargain

Salamander Horde, Large, Intelligent, Organized, Planar

Flaming spear (b[2d6]+3 damage) 7 HP 3 Armor

Close, Reach, Near

**Special Qualities:** Burrowing

“The excavation uncovered what the reports called a basalt gate. Black stone carved with molten runes. When they dug it up, the magi declared it inert but further evidence indicates that was an incorrect claim. The entire team went missing. When we arrived, the gate was glowing. Its light filled the whole cavern. We could see from the entrance that the area had become full of these creatures—like men with red and orange skin, tall as an ogre but with a snake’s tail where their legs ought to be. They were clothed, too—some had black glass armor. They spoke to each other in a tongue that sounded like grease in a fire. I wanted to leave but the sergeant wouldn’t listen. You’ve already read what happened next, sir. I know I’m the only one that got back, but what I said is true. The gate is open, now. This is just the beginning!”
_Instinct_: To consume in flame
-   Summon elemental fire
-   Melt away deception

### Planar Powers
Sometimes, monsters do not come from Dungeon World at all. Beyond the mountains at the edge of the world or below the deepest seas, the sages and wise old priests say that there are gateways to the lands beyond. They speak of elysian fields; rivers of sweet wine and maidens dancing in fields of gold. They tell tales of the paradise of heavens to be found past the Planar Door. Tales tell, too, of the Thousandfold Hell. Of the swirling Elemental Vortex and the devils that wait for the stars to align so they can enter Dungeon World and wreak their bloody havoc. You must be curious to know if these tales are true? What will you see when the passage to the beyond is opened?

Angel Solitary, Construct, Terrifying, Divine, Intelligent, Organized

Sword of Flames (b[2d10]+4 damage, ignores armor) 18 HP 4 Armor

Close, Forceful

**Special Qualities:** Wings

“So was it written that the heavens opened up to Avra’hal and did an angel from the clouds emerge to speak unto her and so did it appear to her as her firstborn daughter—beautiful, of ebon skin and golden eyes—and did Avra’hal weep to see it. ‘Be not afraid,’ it commanded her. ‘Go to the villages I have shown you in your dreams and unto them show the word I have written on your soul.’ Avra’hal wept and wept and did agree to do this and did take up her sword and tome and did into the villages go, a great thirst for blood on her lips for the word the angel wrote upon the soul of Avra’hal was ‘kill’.” _Instinct_: To share divine will

-   Deliver visions and prophecy
-   Stir mortals to action
-   Expose sin and injustice

Barbed Devil Solitary, Large, Planar, Terrifying
Angst, Denial, hurting the self

Spines (d10+3 damage, 3 piercing) 16 HP 3 Armor

Close, Reach, Messy

**Special Qualities:** Spines

There are a thousand forms of devil, maybe more. Some common and some unique. Each time the Inquisitors discover a new one they write it into the Tormentors Codex and the knowledge is shared among the abbeys in the hope that atrocities of that particular sort won’t find their way into the world again. The barbed devil has long been known to the brothers and sisters of the Inquisition. It appears only at a site of great violence or when called by a wayward summoner. Covered in sharp quills, this particular demon revels in the spilling of blood, preferably by impaling victims piecemeal or in whole upon its thorns and letting them die there. Cruel but not particularly effective beyond slaughter. A low inquisitorial priority. _Instinct_: To rend flesh and spill blood

-   Impale someone
-   Kill indiscriminately

Chain Devil Solitary, Planar
Relationships, connections, metaphysical and psychological anchors, self-isolation, introversion

Crush (d10 damage, ignores armor) 12 HP 3 Armor

Close, Reach

Do you think the phrase “drag him to hell” means nothing? It is unfortunately literal, in the case of the chain devil. Appearing differently to each victim, this summoned creature has but a single purpose: to wrap its victim up in binding coils and take it away to a place of torment. Sometimes it will come as a man-shaped mass of rusting iron, hooks and coils of mismatched links. Other times, a roiling tangle of rope or kelp or twisted bloody bedsheets. The results are always the same. _Instinct_: To capture

-   Take a captive
-   Return to whence it came
-   Torture with glee

Concept Elemental Solitary, Devious, Planar, Amorphous

**Special Qualities:** Ideal form

The planes are not as literal as our world. Clothed in the elemental chaos are places of stranger stuff than air and water. Here, rivers of time crash upon shores of crystal fear. Bleak storms of nightmare roil and churn in a laughter-bright sky. Sometimes, the spirits of these places can be lured into our world, though they are infinitely more unpredictable and strange than mere fire or earth might be. Easier to make mistakes, too—one might try calling up a wealth elemental and be surprised to find a murder elemental instead. _Instinct_: To perfect its concept

-   Demonstrate its concept in its purest form

Corrupter Solitary, Devious, Planar, Hoarder
Corruption, greed, avarice, guilt, turning the hideousness within into physical reality

Secret dagger (w[2d8] damage) 12 HP 0 Armor

Close

“Surely, my good man, you must know why I am here. Must know who I am. You said the words. You spilled the blood and followed the instructions almost to the letter. Your pronunciation was a bit off but that’s to be expected. I’ve come to give you what you’ve always wanted, friend. Glory, love, money? Paltry things when you’ve the vaults of hell to plumb. Don’t look so shocked, you knew what this was. You have but one thing we desire. Promise it to us, and the world shall be yours for the taking. Trust me.” _Instinct_: To bargain

-   Offer a deal with horrible consequences
-   Plumb the vaults of hell for a bargaining chip
-   Make a show of power

Hell Hound Group, Planar, Organized
Fear, loathing, guilt, self-doubt, 

Fiery Bite (d8 damage) 10 HP 1 Armor

Close

**Special Qualities:** Hide of shadow

When one reneges on a deal, does not the debtor come for payment? Does the owed party not send someone to collect what is due? So too with the Powers Below. They only want what is theirs. A howling pack of shadows, flame and jagged bone, driven by the hunting horn. They will not cease, they cannot be evaded. _Instinct_: To pursue

-   Follow despite all obstacles
-   Spew fire
-   Summon the forces of hell on their target

Imp Horde, Planar, Intelligent, Organized


Flame gout (d6 damage, ignores armor) 7 HP 1 Armor

Close, Near, Far

These tiny observer-demons often act as a first-time binding subject by neophyte warlocks. They can be found infesting arcane cabals, drinking potions when no one watches, and chasing pets and servants with tiny pitchforks. A caricature of true demonhood, these little creatures are, thankfully, not too difficult to bind or extinguish. _Instinct_: To harass

-   Send information back to hell
-   Cause mischief

