---
aliases: []
---

**Cities**
1. Neverwinter
2. Calimsham
3. Kirkwall
4. Ravnica
5. Sharn
6. Magnimar
7. Absolom

## Eye in the North
In the furthest north, beyond the boundaries of sanity and the laws of nature, stands the wrecked chaos gate, oozing darkness and spewing forth mutating, magical energy: the raw stuff of Chaos. It is a bleeding wound, a tear in the fabric of reality, a gateway to another dimension.
This portal opened into the dimension of pure energy that was then called the Empyrean, and later called the Warp or the Fade.
The shattered Gate of Heaven appears as a great golden ring encircled by massive & unfathomable starmetal machineries, dwarfing the mountains around it. It is covered in runes of unimaginable potency, that glow in the darkness, their dancing shapes altering reality. From the dark reaches of the warpgate pours out the Winds of Magic and mutating clouds of warpstone dust -- magical energy transmuted into a dense solid.
Whether due to enemy attack or structural failure, the eldritch machineries of the gate crashed down upon the world in a burning hail of star-metal. Simultaneously, the north pole imploded, opening rifts into the beyond, and Chaos spewed forth from the spirit realm.
Meteors of warpstone left weirdling contrails that set the skies aflame. The planet shuddered under thunderous impacts, with some meteorites burrowing like animals, gnawing deep into the world’s foundation. A layer of warpstone dust was cast into the air, its mutating properties causing untold atrocities.
