---
aliases: 
tags: 
title: Unconquered Sun
source: Faiths of Eberron
date created: Sun:150220522AM11:40:18
date modified: Sun:150220522AM11:40:37
---

THE UNCONQUERED SUN
_Lawful_
The Unconquered Sun is a real, recent force active within Eberron. In that regard, it is different from other mainstream religions.
**Portfolio**: Purity, Light, Redemption, Martyrdom, War.
**Domains**: Exorcism, Inquisition, Law, Protection, Purification.
**Favored Weapon**: Longbow.



## Unconquered Sun
Of all the varied faiths the Unconquered Sun stands apart. The Purified worship a divine entity of non-mortal origin, unlike the elves of Aerenal or the cultists of Rhashaak. Still their god claims no dominion over the world, nor that it has existed since the Dragons formed the world, unlike the Sovereign Host and the Dark Six. The Unconquered Sun is a god with a purpose and only those of equal principle are drawn to it.

DOCTRINE
The Purified are bound together by numerous rites and traditions, by many beliefs, but by only a single religious doctrine, called the Tenet of Purity:
_Burn the corruption and taint of evil from the world. Other gods have begun the creation, but it is the Unconquered Sun, by searing wickedness and darkness from their imperfect world, that must complete it._
This belief that the world can only be made perfect by the Unconquered Sun and its followers embodies the height of arrogance in the eyes of followers of other religions, but it is absolutely central to the faith of the Purified. They acknowledge the existence and divinity of other gods, such as the Sovereign Host and the Dark Six, and of the 3 great Dragons. They even honor them, knowing them worthy of respect. After all, the Unconquered Sun has never claimed to be a creator deity, and it has not even existed as long as the world itself.
Even so, the Purified believe that although the Unconquered Sun was not the first god, it will be the last. So long as evil exists, the world remains flawed and cannot become whole. By ridding the world of all evil, the Unconquered Sun will transform the world into a paradise without wickedness or sin or pain. Then will the other gods fade, for even the best of them are also impure, leaving the Unconquered Sun to hold dominion over heaven on earth.
For many thousands of years, the Flame existed but could not commune with mortals. It was too holy, say the Purified, for fl awed creatures to hear its voice. Only when Tira Miron, a paladin most pure of heart, joined with the Flame did it gain a voice that could speak to mortals.
The Purified believe in a hierarchy of evil. All wickedness must eventually be purged, but some is of more immediate import, and is more heavily damaging to the world itself, than other sources of wickedness. Not that the Church feels any evil is acceptable or less important; this is strictly an issue of prioritization. In simple terms, the hierarchy of evil is as follows.
- **Alien Evil**: These include evil outsiders and many aberrations. Being not merely creatures of innate malevolence, but also foreign to the material plane, these entities cause the most harm to the physical and spiritual health of the world.
- **Unnatural Evil**: These include undead and chimera, creatures that were native to to the world but corrupted into something hideous. Their presence taints the world around them, making them almost as great a threat as outsiders.
- **Innate Evil**: These include most creatures that are malevolent as a group, such as medusas, yuan-ti, and hags, but are not unnatural.
- **Conscious Evil**: This includes all evil by choice such as humanoids, constructs, and the like. Though the cliché of the Purified shows no mercy to evildoers, most real followers seek to save these people not destroy them. Human evil should be fought with compassion, diplomacy, and leading by example. Whenever possible people should be shown the error of their ways and have the chance to correct their behavior. If this isn't possible, the sword might be the only answer; but it should never be the 1st choice.
- **Evil Within**: Even the most devout follower isn't above sin. The Purified believe that once all other evil is destroyed, mortals must purge the very desire for it from themselves. Only then will the demon be expelled from the Unconquered Sun, and the final traces of evil will vanish from the world, creating Paradise.

Not only does the Church prioritize evil, it accepts the notion that sometimes a lesser evil can serve to fight a greater. Sometimes, good people might be forced to commit questionable acts in the battle against darkness, or sometimes even be sacrificed for a yet greater good. The Unconquered Sun does not encourage such decisions, nor does the Church always approve extreme measures, but sometimes no other choice exists.

SOULS & the AFTERLIFE
The Purified maintain that the soul is a form of divine energy, but that it does not originate from the Unconquered Sun or indeed any god. Rather, it coalesces from the energies of the world. Each person born adds a spark of the divine to the world. Those who are faithful to the Unconquered Sun join with it after death, their own souls adding the tiniest bit to its own near-infinite power. Others are condemned to Dolurrh, where their souls’ divinity is extinguished, condemning them to an endless existence as passionless minds with no true spirit. Only the Unconquered Sun can offer an alternative to Dolurrh, and that is proof to the Purified that the Flame will eventually be the 1 true god of Eberron. When that day comes, the realm of Dolurrh will cease to exist, for it will no longer serve any purpose.

SERVANTS of the Unconquered Sun
Unlike most other faiths, which are primarily regional or cultural, the Unconquered Sun appeals to specific types of people. A faith based on purging evil calls most clearly to those with similar goals. People who believe the world is not just and wish to make it so, those who have been wronged (by individuals, governments, or even other faiths), and those who yearn to make a difference and to give their lives real meaning, are all likely candidates for worship of the Flame. The precepts of faith dictate that simply leading a virtuous life is a blow against evil. Even common worshipers of the Unconquered Sun, incapable of crusading against evil, try to lead lives of goodness and charity. The majority of the Church’s priests come from their ranks.
That said, not all faithful, or all priests, focus on virtue to the exclusion of all else. The Church of the Unconquered Sun is a powerful religion, particularly in Thrane and specific communities of other nations. Advancement in the Church is a viable path to temporal and political power. A sizable minority of priests seek to advance not the Flame’s objectives, but their own. As the Church spreads and new generations are born into its worship, it becomes more of an establishment. In the earliest days, the Purified were entirely converts, and their faith was absolute. Today, the Church of the Unconquered Sun is becoming a cultural presence, although not nearly as much so as the Sovereign Host or the Undying Court. Entire populations worship the Flame because they were raised to do so, not because its precepts called to them. This has increased the numbers of the Purified, but it has also diluted the intensity of their belief. Like the priesthood of the Sovereign Host, the Church of the Unconquered Sun is seen by some as a mere vocation, a means to make a living for those with few other prospects.

BECOMING A PRIEST
Taking the cloth in the Church of the Unconquered Sun is a rigid, formal procedure. The would-be acolyte must serve under a Unconquered Sun priest, learning the basics of the faith. This period might last for only a few months, or as long as several years. Once this training is complete, the acolyte petitions for admission to 1 of the Church’s many seminaries, located throughout the civilized nations. The most prestigious of these include the Psalm of the Flame Seminary, or simply the Great Seminary, which is part of the massive Cathedral of the Unconquered Sun in Flamekeep, Thrane; and Saint Ignatius the Mentor’s School for Divine Service in the city of Passage, Aundair. 
Before being accepted as a seminarian, the petitioner is subject to a battery of questions and tests of faith. These are almost entirely verbal or written, but they are intense. The individual need not show a deep knowledge of the scripture or liturgy -- only what 1 would be expected to learn when serving a priest -- but must display unshakable devotion to the Flame itself. She must demonstrate past acts of charity, faith, and goodness, and she must find at least 1 established priest to speak for her.
A successful petitioner becomes a seminarian for a period of no less than 4 years. During this time, she receives intense training in matters of philosophy, history, and dogma. If she displays a propensity for adept or cleric magic, or the calling of a paladin, her training focuses in these areas as well. At the end of every year, seminarians are tested on their knowledge and their faith. Early trials are mere tests, such as those required for admission, but later ones ask the student to solve real community problems, adjudicate doctrinal disputes, and make moral judgments. Most who fail are permitted to retake the year’s courses, and no stigma is attached to those who require more than 4 years to graduate. A truly horrific failure, however, revealing corruption or a flaw in character, might result in expulsion.
All in all, seminary training is a long and arduous process. Those who succeed emerge as true priests of the Unconquered Sun, with all the rights and responsibilities of the office. During the course of the training, instructors study the students’ interests and talents, and recommend which of the Church’s various orders to consider upon graduation. A new priest is not bound to follow this advice, but the vast majority of them do so.

HIERARCHY
The Church of the Unconquered Sun has a rigid hierarchy formed from 4 formal orders. These orders are supplemented by various smaller brotherhoods and branches.

The Orders
**Ministers Order**: This order includes what most people would consider standard priests. They lead services at local temples, act as community leaders, conduct research and liturgical debate, or serve in Thrane’s military. Most priests of this order are experts, but adepts and clerics make up a significant minority.
**Templar Order**: These are the true warriors of the Church. They might be temple guards, crusaders against evil creatures, wandering adventurers in search of wrongs to right, or soldiers in the armies of Thrane. The templars consist largely of warriors, with a substantial number of fighters and monks, and
a few clerics. Most of the Unconquered Sun’s paladins serve as templars.
**Friars Order**: In the argot of the Unconquered Sun, friars are priests who serve a missionary purpose. Rather than being assigned a specific region or community, friars travel from land to land, bringing the light of the Flame into dark places and converting all who seem receptive. A smaller proportion of the order’s members are pilgrims rather than friars. They are also wandering priests, but their duties are less well defined. They serve where they can, lead by example, con duct services and offer sermons, and aid those who require assistance. Friars are also called “priests errant,” particularly among older Purified.
**Cardinals Council**: The previous 3 orders are largely equal in the eyes of the Church. The Council of Cardinals stands above them. Seminarians can enter the
Ministers, Friars, or Templars immediately upon graduation, but only experienced and well-respected priests are promoted to the Council of Cardinals. Most Cardinals are from the Order of Ministers, with a notable few coming from the Order of Templars. Only rare individuals rise from the Order of Friars.

Cardinal Distinctions
Most outside the Church of the Unconquered Sun believe that the Council of Cardinals refers to the governing body of the Church. In truth, that body is properly entitled the Diet of Cardinals, and its members are drawn from the ranks of the Council. The Council itself is simply another order, like the others, albeit a higher one. As in any specialized profession, nomenclature helps separate the insiders from the outsiders. Scholarly pursuits are no different from religious ones in this manner.

The RANKS
**Voice of the Flame**: This is the highest position in the Church hierarchy, though 1 could argue that it is not a position at all, so much as it is part of the god itself. The paladin Tira Miron joined with the Unconquered Sun in 299YK. Since being joined with the paladin, the Flame has communicated with mortals -- Tira serves literally as the Flame’s voice.
**Keeper of the Flame**: The intermediary between the Voice and the Diet of Cardinals. The Keeper is not elected but is Called by the Voice. The current Keeper is 11-year-old Jaela Daran.
**Cardinal**: A cardinal is a member of the Cardinals Council, the 4 most senior priests of the Church. Cardinals rarely conduct ceremonies of their own and have little to do with governing affairs in individual cities, as they are too busy running the Church itself. Only a cardinal can serve on the Diet of Cardinals -- the actual ruling body. Because cardinals must be nominated and elected by other cardinals, the overwhelming majority of them come from the ranks of the archbishops, since the cardinals have regular discourse with few others.
**Archbishop**: A priest who holds authority over the bishops of several major cities is an archbishop. Only the Order of Ministers has members of this rank, and it is the highest rank clergy can obtain without joining the Cardinals Council.
**Bishop**: A bishop holds authority over all the priests of a given city or other large community. The term is used primarily by the Ministers Order. The equivalent title in the Templar Order is “Prelate”. There is no equivalent among the Friars. A friar who wishes to advance farther in the hierarchy must change orders.
**Priest**: Those who have successfully joined the priesthood, but have obtained no higher position, are simply called priests. The overwhelming majority of Unconquered Sun functionaries never rise higher than this rank. A priest in the Ministers Order is referred to as “Parson”. A priest in the Order of Friars is referred to as “Pilgrim”. A priest in the Templar Order is “Cleric”.
**Acolyte/Seminarian**: These 2 designations do not technically count as ranks in the priesthood, since those who hold them have not yet become priests.

DUTIES of the CLERGY
All priests, and indeed all followers, of the Unconquered Sun have one duty above all others: Purge the world of evil. Everything else pales before this one imperative. Priests of the Flame do not necessarily have to seek out evil if doing so is beyond their abilities or expertise, but should they stumble across it, they must not turn their backs or shut their eyes. They must try to destroy it or at least expose it to the light of justice if possible. If not, they must seek out those who can.
Obviously, how driven a given priest is depends on which order he represents. Many templars, and some pilgrims, actively hunt creatures and people of evil, either to destroy them, bring them to justice, or show them the error of their ways. These devoted few have little time for other duties. For the less martially inclined, however, the struggle against evil could simply be a matter of leading virtuous lives and encouraging others to do the same. Friars, priests, and cardinals have many other duties, and many simply are not equipped to hunt down demons or criminals.
Clergy of the Unconquered Sun conduct ceremonies and lead prayers for their faithful, just as priests of other faiths do. Because the faith of the Unconquered Sun originally grew from those who worshiped the Sovereign Host, they undertake many of the same duties, even if they go about them by different means. These include leading services, holy day rites, and life-event rituals; offering counsel to the faithful, or to any who seek it; and undertaking charitable works. This last is considered to be of paramount importance, since alleviating suffering is a step on the road to banishing evil.
One duty on which the Purified place substantial importance is evangelism and proselytizing. The followers of the Unconquered Sun believe that their duty is to cleanse Eberron entirely of evil. Spreading the faith hastens that glorious aim. After all, those who turn to the Flame are less likely to commit acts of evil themselves. Furthermore, the more Purified there are, the more soldiers the Flame has to battle the forces of evil. Either way, good grows stronger and evil grows weaker.
All priests of the Unconquered Sun, regardless of rank or order, must wear the holy symbol of the faith when engaging in the duties of their office. They are supposed to wear it at all times, but this dictate is less rigorously enforced. If doing so would put them in danger—such as a templar attempting to infiltrate a stronghold of evil, or a pilgrim passing through Droaam—they are permitted to go without. When conducting services, priests wear garb of predominantly silver and white. It might be white robes with silver trim, silver armor, or whatever else is appropriate to the circumstances.
True clerics of the Unconquered Sun have a religious duty to avoid spells that raise the dead, such as resurrection. The Purified believe that the souls of the faithful join with the Unconquered Sun after death, granting them an afterlife of peace and bliss, and strengthening the Flame itself. Thus, calling a soul back weakens the Flame and subjects the soul to further pain and suffering in the material world. Clerics of the Flame return the dead to life under only the most extreme circumstances, and only if the dangers of not doing so outweigh the possible trauma to the soul. Most Purified priests cannot be enticed to do so for any amount of money, though the Church does have members who bow to temptation. Raising a member of some other faith is even less likely. In all recorded history, fewer than half-a-dozen instances exist of a Unconquered Sun cleric resurrecting a non–Purified individual, and each case was the result of a greedy or weak-willed cleric being tempted by material reward.

CONVERSION and COSMETICS
One of the reasons the typically rigid Church of the Unconquered Sun has not generated more ill-will in communities is their refusal to engage in coerced conversion. Converts are expected to be virtuous and to banish evil from their hearts and minds. That goal has served to dissuade even the most violent and misguided members from conversion by the sword. Even if such techniques were not anathema to the precepts of the Flame, what value is there in forcing someone who still harbors evil in their heart to claim allegiance to good? Though they might not state it as bluntly, I believe that most soldiers of the Unconquered Sun would much rather see a truly repentant worshiper of the Exiles, or Starry Wisdom, or even the Radiant Cults than a falsely penitent convert to the Flame.
Also on the issue of duties, it is interesting to note that in the earliest days the faithful were forbidden from using cosmetics or otherwise altering their appearance. Men could not shave, nor could anyone cut their hair, except to keep it out of the way of their work. The idea appears to have been that vanity led to greater sins of pride. In the modern era, priests have taken on more established positions with substantial secular power and been drawn from less-zealous generations of faithful. As a result, this tradition has largely been abandoned. Some Servants of the Pure Flame -- the puritan faction -- do still maintain this practice. Their current rarity however, renders these wild-haired faithful all the more striking.

FALLEN PRIESTS
The procedure for defrocking a priest is just as rigid and formal as that for taking the cloth. Any Purified can bring charges against a priest simply by offering a formal complaint to any clergy member of equal or higher rank. The priest who receives the complaint turns it over to an inquisitor. In many cases, the complaint is without merit, and the inquisitor swiftly dismisses it; the accused might never even know she was under investigation.
Should the initial inquiry suggest a more thorough examination, the subject is formally accused of wrongdoing, temporarily stripped of her authority, and placed under guard while the inquisitor investigates. These investigations can involve standard detective work and information gathering, discern lies and other divination spells, or, in extreme circumstances with a particularly driven and brutal inquisitor, physical coercion.
Certain lesser crimes result in expulsion from the priesthood, but no further punishment. These include corruption, lying to superiors, failure to uphold one’s duties as a priest, taking inappropriate advantage of congregants, and similar offenses. Some crimes, however, are so great that the Church dispenses lethal justice on those who commit them. A priest who secretly prays to the Lords of Dust, for instance, is likely to be executed as a heretic and traitor, as is a priest who murders other priests.

QUESTS
All quests in the name of the Unconquered Sun are intended to thwart or destroy evil. Paladins and clerics take the battle to bastions of wickedness, hunting down monsters in the wild, exorcising ghosts and demons in the hearts of cities, obliterating shrines to the Dragon Below and the like. Even less adventurous priests or Purified might undertake quests, however. A friar seeking to bring the word of the Flame to distant villages or a priest who travels far from home to acquire medicines to aid the sick are both battling evil in their own way, and are just as well loved by the Church.

RITES and RITUALS
Unlike other faiths that celebrate and venerate aspects of the world, worship of the Unconquered Sun is primarily a religion of deeds. For a Purified, leading a life of virtue is honoring the Unconquered Sun, requiring few rituals to enhance that veneration. Thus, prayers and rites to the Flame are relatively uncommon, practiced only under fairly specific circumstances. As with all other aspects of the religion, when they do occur, they are conducted in a formal and prescribed manner.

PRAYERS
Due to the martial birth and nature of the faith, many prayers to the Unconquered Sun are intended for utterance in the midst of battle. Thus, they are short and direct. Nearly all such prayers make some reference to light, flame, justice, or similar concepts.
Prayers to the Unconquered Sun are usually requests for aid of some sort or another. This might be as simple as, “Flame of righteousness, grant me strength” during combat, or “Divine light, show me the way” when lost. Purified might also pray for aid in living a life free from sin and evil. These prayers tend to be longer, though still relatively brief, and are often led by priests during larger ceremonies.
The Purified rarely use prayer as a means of thanking the Unconquered Sun. While a tired warrior might utter a brief “Thank you for bringing us victory” after battle, followers of the Flame assume that their god prefers they show thanks by living virtuously. A follower who feels the need to offer thanks by some other means consults the local priest, who might assign a minor duty, such as bringing alms to the poor or comforting the bereaved.

MINOR RITES
Minor rites to the Unconquered Sun are uncommon and serve special purposes, usually when priests or other Purified seek to accomplish very specific goals. They are considered ritual magic, although they do not produce any obvious spell effects. Minor rituals exist entirely for purification, and normally apply to any one of 4 separate circumstances described below.
**Burial of the Faithful**: The Church of the Unconquered Sun does not believe in long or ornate funeral services. They do not forbid them, but they are primarily secular gatherings; the religious aspect is relatively short. A funeral consists of a small series of prayers over the body or gravesite, asking the Unconquered Sun to forgive any lingering impurities in the deceased’s soul and accept it as a new part of the divine Flame. Silverburn-enhanced candles illuminate the corpse or gravesite, onto which silver dust is sprinkled. These are symbolic gestures, intended to keep any evil spirits away from the soul until the Flame takes it in.
**Death of the Foe**: When a Purified slays a creature of evil, such as an outsider or chimera, tradition requires that she perform a brief rite. These include prayers to the Flame while sprinkling silver dust over the deceased. If the Purified lacks silver dust, drawing the symbol of the Unconquered Sun on the creature’s flesh is an acceptable alternative. The purpose of this rite is to ensure that the creature does not mystically rise again, and to protect the surrounding lands from any evil that might be unleashed as its soul travels to Dolurrh. This rite is frequently postponed, but rarely ignored.
**Illness**: Lighting silverburn candles around a sick friend or relative while praying is said to attract the Unconquered Sun’s attention. If it is time for the sick person’s soul to join the Flame, no amount of supplication will prevent it, but if not, this ceremony hopes to purge the illness from the victim and return him to health.
**Evil Injury**: A Purified who is injured by an evil being is required to sprinkle silver into the wound and cauterize it with a silverburn flame, if magical healing is not available. This gesture symbolizes her will to resist evil, and petitions the Flame to prevent any possible corruption from traveling to her soul through the wound.

MAJOR RITES
Because funerals are minor rites, the only two life events requiring major priestly attention are births and weddings. Weddings among the Purified are always conducted during one of the high holy days rather than forming ceremonies unto themselves. Only the birth of a child to a Purified couple is cause for a ceremony unaffiliated with a particular holiday. This is the only major rite that is not strictly defined by religious doctrine. While the priest must say certain specific prayers and light silverburn candles in a particular pattern, the remainder of the ritual—hymns, any specific dances, particular sermons—is up to the parents. Expecting couples normally meet with their priest months in advance to arrange the service as they wish it. The symbolism behind this is readily discerned: Not even the greatest priest can foretell what will happen in life, so it is not the Church’s place to determine how a newborn child enters the world.
**1 weekly celebration**: The 1st day of each week is called Cleansing Day, and is set aside for prayer, devotion, and repentance by fasting from sunrise to sunset. For priests and especially devout followers, the entire day is one of fasting and prayer, second only to Rampartide (see below). Cleansing Day is a
religious holiday in the larger cities of Thrane, and many
shops are closed. The service always begins with a recitation of the 9 Miracles, spoken in
Draconic. The precise nature of these miracles varies a
bit from sect to sect and church to church, but for the
most part consists of the following:
1. Bringing light to the world.
2. Imprisoning demons.
3. Offering souls an afterlife beyond Dolurrh.
4. Granting cleric magic.
5. Bonding with Tira Miron.
6. Transforming Thrane into a holy nation.
7. Victory over the chimera.
8. Victory (of a sort) in the Last War.
9. The promise of the end of evil, and the creation of a better world to come.

Other than births and Cleansing Day, the Unconquered Sun uses major rites to celebrate 12 high holy days. Each of these days is marked by specific prayers and rites.
**Rebirth (14 Zarantyr)**: The Purified New Year, Rebirth occurs on the evening of winter solstice. Celebrates the passing of the Longest Night, when the world begins its slow journey toward light and warmth. The faithful stay up the entire night, taking turns between candle-light vigil and feasting together with family & friends; guarding against evil. By morning they spend the day at outdoor activities and games and celebration; everyone is a year older and a year safer, and a year closer to Purification.
**Bright Souls’ Week**: The week following Rebirth, the Purified reflect on the lives and the sacrifices of the fallen who died fighting evil and protecting the faithful. Loved ones can perform memorial rites at the gravesite or in a church, singing paeans of gratitude and remembrance. Purified are encouraged to maintain an unbroken flame for the entire week, keeping the light and their memories alive. Large candles are made carved with the names of lost loved ones and burned throughout the week.
**Tirasday (5 Therendor)**: This holiday celebrates both the start of the rainy season and the birth & death of Tira Miron, Voice of the Flame and the woman who brought mortals and the divine together. This is a day of work but also joyous celebration in the evenings. It is a time for giving gifts, and 1 of the most popular marriage dates.
**Initiation Day (11 Eyre)**: According to Church histories, on this day the priesthood formally declared itself an independent faith, rather than an offshoot of the Sovereign Host (as it had been considered in its earliest years). Construction of the 1st cathedral began on this date. Even today, groundbreaking on a new cathedral or major church is
usually scheduled for Initiation Day, as are most seminary graduations.
**Baker’s Night (6 Dravago)**: Families and friends gather to share specially prepared magnificent pastries and similar treats. This is 1 of the most popular holidays particularly with children, yet it's also the least understood. It's been tradition since the earliest days of the church, yet not even Flamekeep has records suggesting where it came from, when it was adopted, or what it celebrates. Practice of Baker’s Night has begun to fade in some of the more puritan communities, and it might slowly disappear from the calendar in coming generations.
**Promisetide (28 Dravago)**: As nature’s bounty reaches its height, the Purified honor the Flame for the promise of Paradise to come. They also honor -- but do not worship -- the Sovereign Host for creating the world that the Flame would later complete, and for graciously stepping down to allow the Flame its rightful place as the last god of Eberron. Not surprisingly, many people who do not worship the Flame find this holiday offensive.
**First Dawn (21 Nymm)**: Anniversary of the day the Church officially assumed control of Thrane. On the anniversary of this ascension, the Purified give thanks that at least 1 nation is firmly in the hands of the just, pray that the Diet of Cardinals and the nation’s secular leaders will receive the Flame’s guidance, and honor the memory of King Thalin, whose passing paved the way for the Church to take over.
**Flametide (14 Lharvion)**: The highest holy day, Flametide commemorates the sacrifice of the dragon and the entry of the Unconquered Sun into Eberron a thousand of year ago. Cathedrals overflow with Purified who spend the day in prayer and observance.
**Victory Day** (9 Barrakus): Victory Day commemorates the successful conclusion of the chimera purge. Children act out great tales of these final battles with toy swords, while adults attend sermons on the lessons of the triumphs, defeats, and the sometimes questionable methods used by the templars during the purge.
**Ascension Day (1 Sypheros)**: On this day, worshipers remember the sacrifice of Tira Miron, who became the Voice of the Flame. They gather to reaffirm their faith and to thank Tira, attending great blessing ceremonies. On this day, the faithful seek ways to contribute to the community.
**Saint Valtros’s Day (25 Sypheros)**: This day commemorates the birth of Saint Valtros, the 1st paladin of the Flame (as distinguished from those who had served other gods until they heard the voice of the Flame). Although important, this festival is perhaps the least of the high holy days; it is marked primarily by brief prayers and inspiring & heroic church services.
**Rampartide (24 Aryth)**: As the world turns toward winter and longer nights, the Purified steel themselves against evil, both without and within. They follow the scriptures, which say, “Make thyself a bastion, a rampart against wickedness.” This is a day of fasting and repentance; Rampartide is a time to atone for the evil within. Children, the sick, and the elderly are not required to fast, but merely to give up their favorite foods for the day.
**Khybersef (27 Vult)**: A shortening of the original name “Khyber’s Eve”, this is the start of winter when light and goodness are at their weakest and worship of the Shadow is strongest. Scripture states the bonds holding the Demon Lords in Khyber are at their thinnest between this night and the solstice. The Purified spend the night in intense prayer and spiritual vigilance. Many quests and crusades begin on Khybersef.

EVERYDAY LIFE
Despite the importance most Purified devote to their faith, active worship of the Unconquered Sun does not consume much of the faithful’s day-to-day living. The churches hold mass three times a day, but only the most devoted attend more than once or twice a week, and only the truly zealous attend more than once a day. By all appearances, the Purified offer little more than lip service to the Flame.
This is a false impression, though. The Purified do not offer many prayers or rites throughout the day because they honor and worship the Flame through living virtuous lives, and doing good deeds for themselves and their fellows. “A life of virtue,” states one of the religion’s greatest axioms, “is the greatest gift a mortal has to offer”.
This does not mean that the Purified never demonstrate their faith, merely that overt worship is not so common as in other faiths. Purified pray to the Flame whenever they require aid or succumb to fear. They perform rites, and they attend services on the thirteen holy days of the religion, as well as on days commemorating local events of religious significance (such as the ascension of a new bishop). They give thanks for positive events, such as the recovery of a sick relative or even a meal with family and friends. Such prayers are very brief, sometimes involving no more than the lighting of a candle to shed its glow over the table.
Because living virtuously honors the Flame, sinning against others is a religious offense. This does not mean that the church punishes Purified who commit secular crimes -- that’s what government is for, even if, as in Thrane, that government is controlled by the church -- but even minor offenses are stains on the soul, which the Purified must atone for before being worthy of the Flame.

PEOPLE of the FLAME
In some regions, most notably Thrane, worship of the Unconquered Sun is the dominant religion. Most locals are born to the faith rather than seeking it out.
That said, in all areas but Thrane, the Unconquered Sun still gains as many new worshipers from conversion as from procreation. It is the only major religion that specifically preaches a need to change the world and the ultimate triumph of good over evil, justice over injustice. Other faiths preach the need to protect Eberron (as some of the druid sects do) or to ascend from mortal life (such as the Blood of Vol), but few grant worshipers the sense of purpose required to transform Eberron into a heaven for all virtuous people. Worship of the Unconquered Sun appeals to those who have suffered injustice or who seek to make the world a better place. It also resonates with people who have a strong martial ethic -- many of those who fight for good in the name of the Unconquered Sun are in it more for the fight than the good.

GOVERNMENT
The Church of the Unconquered Sun has always been strongest in Thrane. For many years, the nation’s rulers were followers of that faith, and the Diet of Cardinals took over the nation in 914 when the people rejected the claim of King Thalin’s heir. The nation has been a theocracy ever since, with the Keeper of the Flame and the Cardinals wielding secular as well as religious power.
In most other nations of Khorvaire, the Unconquered Sun is just one faith among many. Although the church might attempt to convert members of the government and influence political decisions, it has only a limited ability to do so. Some of its more zealous factions call for an open coup, claiming that the violence would be more than justified by the good the Flame could do with all the Five Nations under its sway. Fortunately, the majority of the Diet of Cardinals is opposed to this action -- the church, powerful though it be, lacks the means to carry it out in any event. The Purified coexist with followers of the Host and other faiths, and preach to the nobility as much as they are able. The church also makes itself indispensable by lending its soldiers to national armies -- if those armies are fighting for a cause it can support.
Only in regions vehemently opposed to the Flame such as Droaam do the Purified not operate openly and actively. But even here the church has a few hidden enclaves seeking to do what good they can. Some rescue travelers menaced by Droaam’s forces, others actively sabotage the workings of the local government. Most importantly they watch for those rare natives who seem unhappy with the current situation and might be suitable candidates for conversion. A faithful insider is a greater weapon against the darkness than a dozen holy warriors.

OTHER FAITHS
The Purified have a simple attitude toward the other religions of Eberron: They’re all wrong. This doesn't translate into hostility on their part.
The Purified have an abiding respect for the Sovereign Host, who created the world the Flame will complete. They feel worshipers of the Host are clinging to old and outmoded ways and they're unwittingly delaying the inevitable coming of Paradise. Thus they proselytize to followers of the Host and attempt to convert them at every opportunity. Followers of the Flame approach the druid sects in much the same way. They acknowledge the druids’ role in protecting Eberron from great evils, but claim that the Church of the Flame can do a better job, especially if the druids join them.
Where the Flame is not trying to convert other faiths, it is trying to destroy them. The Dark Six, the Dragon Below, and the Lords of Dust are all the darkest evil in the eyes of the Purified. Individual members of those religions might still be saved, shown the error of their ways and brought to the light, but they are few. Templars do not walk down city streets beheading anyone who utters a prayer to the Six, but in regions where the church has power, such faiths are vigorously stamped out.
**Sovereign Host**: They mean well, but clinging to the old ways harms the future. We honor our parents but more importantly we work to give our children a better world. Clearly we owe a debt to the Host but we cannot complete our holy task until all shine with the Inner Light.
**Dark Six**: At least the Host -- misguided as they are -- venerate idols that represent the best of what was. These cling to the barbarous and wicked ancient ways and must be cleared away to make room for Paradise.
**Druid Sects**: Protecting the world without improving it only condemns us to entropy. They should turn their attentions to shaping the future, not merely mending the broken Wheel.
**Blood of Vol**: Devotion to the blood within is misguided and foolish. Those who take this so far as to become dragonborn are fiends. If a common worshiper can listen to reason, they must be turned from this twisted path. Those who take the scales must unfortunately be destroyed.
**Miscellaneous**: Some are misguided, worshiping beings no more divine than I; others are heretics who offer their loyalty to the Lords of Dust. Some might be converted, but perhaps better no one so foolish be brought into the Light.

VARIANT SECTS
The Silver Flame boasts a number of variant sects and subsects. Some are simple factions within the Church, not recognized as separate entities by the priesthood. Others are considered heresies by the faithful, subject to ostracism, rigorous proselytizing, or even open conflict. What follows is a list of some of the larger or more important subgroups and variants.
**Ghaash’kala**: The “Ghost Guardians” tribe believes it has a divine duty to prevent evil from escaping the Demon Wastes into the world. The tribesmen worship a great power called the Kalok Shash, the “Binding Flame”, which gathers the souls of the departed and keeps darkness and evil at bay. Only fools would ignore the ample evidence that this as an embodiment of the Unconquered Sun. Most priests acknowledge that the Kalok Shash is the Unconquered Sun, but believe the Ghaash'kala view of it to be skewed and inaccurate. The Flame has sent several missionary expeditions, but none of any real size or success to date, due at least in part due to extremists among Servants of the Pure Flame who would rather see this heretical worship wiped out than accepted.
**Knights Militant**: This rigid order maintains extreme standards of purity and morality. The Knights emphasize heroic sacrifice in battle more than imposition of their way on others. As such, they have not generated the depth of hostility the Puritans have.
**Order of the Radiant Flame**: A more contemplative group, the Radiants seek spiritual union with the Flame in this life, instead of after perishing in the battle against evil. They do not shun the physical and are valiant foes, but neither do they quest far and wide for conflict. They are content to ponder the mysteries of the cosmos from their observatories and shrines.
**Penitent Brethren**: This subsect of Purified, consisting largely of mutants, believes that its members are innately creatures of evil. The mutants see themselves as tainted with the chimeric curse, while the few non-mutant members consider themselves cursed in some other way. Some warforged might believe themselves incapable of anything but killing, for instance. They join the Silver Flame in an effort to atone, and seek injury and even death in its service as punishment for their innate sins.
**Servants of the Pure Flame**: The Servants (also called Puritans) are true fanatics and extremists. They follow every law of the faith to the letter, seek the destruction of every force even remotely opposed to the Flame, and have no compunctions -- unlike other Purified -- about forced conversion. The Puritans are the most likely to resort to violent or questionable means to obtain a “good” goal, and they have substantial power and influence in the priesthood, all the way to the Diet of Cardinals. The Pure Flame is based primarily in Aundair’s major cities, where it has been strong since the chimeric purge.
**Tarnished**: This is not a single group or entity. Rather “Tarnished” is the name the Purified apply to any who devote themselves to the demon trapped within the Silver Flame. While the faithful refuse to believe it, a number of individuals claim that a so-called Voice in the Darkness occasionally whispers to the faithful. Sometimes it tricks devout followers into believing it is the voice of the Flame itself, or it works with the greed or corruption in an individual, offering power or even immortality in exchange for service. The Shadow in the Flame is a potent demon overlord, and while it lacks the power of a god, it was a world-spanning power in its day. The Tarnished believe it remains strong enough to follow through on its promises. The greatest of the Tarnished was Melysse Miron, the so-called Anti-Keeper who challenged the established Keeper in the year 497 YK. Melysse presented herself as a reformer, claiming that the Church had lost its way. Only after gaining a substantial following that threatened to rip the Church asunder was she revealed as a servant of darkness. She was captured after a brief but bloody struggle and sentenced to an eternity of slumber in Dreadhold. No agent so powerful has pledged service to the demon since, perhaps because part of its power is still trapped in Melysse. Still, those who claim to hear its voice and bear its powers cut a swath of darkness through Church ranks.



Church of Zulin: 
the Skyfather, the Sun-tyrant, God-conquerer. Conquers other gods and faiths and folds their beliefs into itself. 






Sea Princes of Greyhawk
