---
aliases: 
tags: 
source: Faiths of Eberron
title: Endless Serpent
date created: Sun:150220522PM15:30:41
date modified: Sun:150220522PM18:19:53
---
# Faction-Endless Serpent

THE ENDLESS SERPENT
_Chaotic_
Those who follow the Endless Serpent seek immortality from within.
**Portfolio**: Alchemy, Immortality, Blood, Destiny, Obedience, Dragons.
**Domains**: Death, Death-bound, Law, Life, Dragon, Necromancy.
**Favored Weapon**: Dagger.

Few religions are as misunderstood as the spiritual path known as the Endless Serpent. Seekers do not worship a divine entity, nor do they revere their ancestors, as do the Aerenal. Indeed it would be difficult to classify the Endless Serpent as a religion at all were it not for the fact that its adherents do believe in a divinity -- albeit a most unusual one.

**Doctrine**
If any single religious doctrine unites the Endless Serpent, it is the concept worshipers call the Divinity Within. This notion is embodied in one of the Seekers’ most treasured axioms, spoken at the opening of almost every ritual gathering:
_Look not to the skies above, nor the depths below, nor even to the distant past or future. We seek the divine within, for the blood is the life, and in its call can be heard the promise of life eternal, if one is but to listen._
This chant illustrates how the faith stands apart from more traditional religions. Seekers believe in no divinity but that which they hope to ignite within themselves, and refuse to acknowledge the existence of any "god" on principle alone. To them, followers of the Sovereign Host and the Dark Six are living deluded lives that will ultimately end in despair. Seeker philosophy acknowledges the 3 great Dragons but views them more conceptually than as literal beings. Worshipers believe in the power of things seen and grasped, and a dragonshard can be held in the hands, power coursing through it. Seekers hold that any "creator" who would devise the Cycle of the Wheel is worthy only of contempt. Thus, the faith focuses on the pragmatic -- specifically, the life-or-death coin toss that is existence.
Seekers believe that traditional faith is a self-indulgent conceit, a means for small minds and smaller souls to come to terms with the true nature of existence. In a world as unforgiving as this, the only faith that is not misplaced is faith in you and yours.

SOULS AND THE AFTERLIFE
Seekers maintain that blood itself is the "soul" of life, coursing through the veins of sentient creatures like a liquid god. In the mindset of most Serpent cults, creatures that know nothing of blood -- constructs, plants, oozes, and the like -- are thus removed from the possibility of true divinity. Doctrine holds that blood truly is life, and without it, there is no real life at all. As a result Seekers believe that blood holds the key to myriad doorways of power and wisdom, including the greatest passage of all: the door to life everlasting.
The concept of the Divinity Within is central to the Seekers’ view of the soul and to any notion of an afterlife. They absolutely believe the Cycle of the Wheel. The Endless Serpent maintains that the key to escaping the cycle of rebirth lies in the Divinity Within. Those who look outward for succor are destined for betrayal by the very powers they revere, doomed to an endless cycle of meaningless suffering. Only by looking inward, and by drawing strength from the Divinity Within, can a soul hope to find its own afterlife: a beautiful creation crafted to its particular nature and character, and filled with an eternity of happiness.

_**Symbol of the Endless Serpent**
Despite its lack of organization, the Endless Serpent maintains a surprisingly consistent symbol for its faith worldwide. Every cell I have seen or read about used at least a variation of the same icon -- a stylized serpent coiled into infinity with a red teardrop gem symbolizing the blood that is central to their beliefs.
The significance of the serpent is obvious to anyone even slightly familiar with the Endless Serpent. What else would a self-styled "Queen of Dragons" use to aggrandize herself and her faith? It would be surprising if a religion of death-obsessed alchemists did not have a serpent of some sort in their symbology. Some of my colleagues have theorized that the faith claims a far deeper connection to the various Cults of the Dragon Below than many realize, and that this symbol is the proof. This assertion makes little sense, since such a blatant reference would nullify any attempt at hiding said connections. No, the tie must lie elsewhere, though I have yet to discover what it could possibly be._

SERVANTS of the Endless Serpent
Unlike the cult’s enemies in the Unconquered Flame, the people of Scales are an exceedingly diverse lot who would be surprised to learn that they have anything at all in common. The faith incorporates all the diversity of the Sovereign Host, and is spread out just as far, but with fewer members in its global congregation.

COMING TO THE FAITH
The most telling characteristic of the Endless Serpent is the variety of ways in which its followers come to the faith. Only a specific type of person actively seeks to join a religion such as the Unconquered Flame, and being brought up within the Church is no guarantee of continued faith. By contrast, almost anyone could seek out a Serpent cult. Despite the faith’s broad-reaching charter 1 trait is common to every Seeker regardless of origin -- unshakable belief in the power of the self. Any true student of the Serpent’s mysteries is a devotee of the Divinity Within, and whatever else a soul might be, so long as it stands firm by this single creed, it will always be a Seeker at heart. This unifying belief not only lends strength to the faith as a whole, but fosters power and versatility in its congregation.

BECOMING A PRIEST
While there are no true priests in the sense of an organized hierarchy, a sort of lay clergy takes leading roles in the overall movement. Once their understanding of the Divinity Within has progressed beyond a certain point, some Seekers feel compelled to help others find the path and are subsequently exalted to the role of Leader by popular vote. In theory, joining the Table of Leaders takes nothing more than a clear understanding of its role in the journey of the individual, and a strong desire to serve. In practice of course things play out somewhat differently.
A secretive circle of advisors and functionaries known as the Balanced Scales acts as the "investigation & compliance arm" of the faith, maintaining consistency of doctrine throughout the disparate sects and cells.
Most would-be Leaders of are carefully investigated by Scales agents before being exalted. In order to maintain this structure, the 1st Chair of the Table of Leaders has to be "in the know". Each cult of any size has a temple head who is in direct communication with the Balanced Scales or is an active part of it (the latter is always the case with the largest temples).
When a potential new Leader appears, the 1st Chair sends word to superiors in the Balanced Scales. While waiting for an official reply, the 1st Chair begins to test the would-be Leader on matters of faith -- specifically knowledge of the twin subjects of life and death. He also conducts a special Sacrament of Blood in the petitioner’s honor, secretly preserving the blood for delivery to the Balanced Scales. When the Scales finally does address the request, it has accumulated enough information to provide a detailed recommendation 1 way or the other. If all goes smoothly, the 1st Chair is notified to induct the petitioner into the Table of Leaders. If not,...
The specifics vary from one group to the next, and some cults are cut off entirely from the Balanced Scales, but most new Leaders go through some period of probation akin to apprenticeship. Usually, this probation lasts no longer than 3 years, and no less than 1 year. During this time, the acolyte studies intensely in matters of death, history, and spirituality. An individual who displays a propensity for magic receives additional education and training in these areas. At the close of each year, the 1st Chair submits another report to the Balanced Scales. Based on this report and its own interim findings the Scales decides either to let the acolyte in on the truth, or to keep him ignorant for another year. If permission is not granted to indoctrinate the acolyte into the truth after the 3rd or 4th year, they never will be.

HIERARCHY
Although it might seem disorganized in comparison to certain faiths, the Endless Serpent is a formal hierarchy, as rigorous as any other. The difference lies in the levels of secrecy maintained, and in the flow of information throughout every level of the faith. While many are unaware of it, the religion maintains a number of suborders and titles, the most pivotal of which are as follows.
**The Balanced Scales**: Operations would be severely impeded were it not for a guiding council. For centuries, the Balanced Scales has been the primary link between the day-to-day operations of the faith worldwide. The Scales numbers 25, each of whom has managed to bypass the rigors of time through some form of blood magic. Unlike other tiers of the faith, those who sit on this council know the identities of their fellow Scales members, and the entire body is protected by the mightiest magic at their disposal. Few could even hope to divine the existence of the Balanced Scales, let alone its makeup or the location of individual members.
**The Abactors**: The Balanced Scales maintains a network of Seekers known as abactors. Each is a 1st Chair, responsible for the operation of both a temple and cult of substantial size. The 2 groups are not mutually exclusive, and a handful of those in the Balanced Scales are abactors themselves. Abactors are by definition Seekers with magical training within the Endless Serpent. Their ability and trustworthiness sets them apart from other Leaders, and they are inducted into the deepest mysteries of the faith. In return, they coordinate the induction of new cult members and oversee the collection and shipping of preserved blood to Covenant-chosen areas.
**Order of the Emerald Claw**: Not beneath so much as beside the network of abactors is the paramilitary arm in Zir and beyond, the Order of the Emerald Claw. Ties to the Endless Serpent are known only to the highest ranks of the Order. Given the Order’s high profile, especially in Zir, security is a top concern, and even the most trusted unit commander typically knows only her immediate superior in the Scales (usually by false name or face). In this manner does they protect themselves and their secrets.
**The Leaders**: The lowest rung on the ladder of faith hierarchy is the Table of Leaders. Many in this tier are ignorant of the truth of the religion’s makeup, even after years of faithful service. Leaders hail from all walks of life, and were it not for common ritual and symbology, they would fail to recognize one another on a busy street.

DUTIES OF THE CLERGY
Every Leader shares the same duty as every follower: Seek out the Divinity Within. Even those who have already unlocked their own potential divinity, becoming immortal dragonborn, are expected to continue research in the mysteries of life, death, and beyond. All Leaders must obey reasonable orders from their superiors in the faith. For most, this means executing the local 1st Chair’s commands without question. For 1st Chairs and others in the know, it means following the orders of the Balanced Scales to the letter.
The leadership of the Endless Serpent conducts ceremonies and lead important rituals, just as priests of other faiths do. In all but the most savage of cults, Leaders can be found fulfilling mundane roles in the lives of their fellow Seekers, offering counsel and aid to the faithful.
There is no single, mandated holy symbol associated with the faith. While the Endless Serpent has a symbol, which sees a great deal of usage as a holy symbol, it is not the holy symbol of the faith. Having a ritualistic holy symbol doesn't line up with the doctrine of the faith, so most adherents don't use one. This unorthodox practice not only reflects the faith’s focus on the individual, but also keeps its activities private. Along the same lines, Leaders are not expected to don any particular attire. When conducting services, they wear garb of particular high quality, but nothing more. Shaved heads are common, especially in some cults, but are not mandated.
Clerics of the Endless Serpent specialize in mastery of necromancy and alchemy, especially those dealing with death or the animation of tissue. A strong grasp of how magic interacts with death and the soul is fundamental to understanding the Divinity Within. Those who have the power to heal are seen as spiritually advanced, thus gaining greater status and respect. Anyone capable of resurrection is deemed particularly blessed.

FALLEN PRIESTS
The procedure for removing a priest of the Endless Serpent is disturbingly uncomplicated. As a rule they are simply excluded from the Leader's Table, and become a regular member once more. It's unlikely they'll be asked back to the table every again. Those that would prove too dangerous to the membership invariably move away or otherwise disappear. Interlopers in the faith are exiled forever; this harsh treatment typically occurs only when a Leader is discovered to be actively serving the interests of a rival faith, most often the Unconquered Flame. In the eyes of many Seekers, particularly those who know the truth about the faith, such punishment is "too good" for the offending traitor.

QUESTS
Ostensibly most quests in the name of the faith are intended to acquire something Seekers hope will provide insight into the mysteries of life and beyond. Often a relic or scrap of data from before the Last War, such an item could also be a vision or even a living being. In practice the majority of quests are little more than dirty work commissioned by the higher-ups in the faith to advance their cause politically. The faith’s leaders have no qualms about deceiving those who have not yet been brought into the fold, and indeed service without question determines whether one is likely ever to be so inducted. In this regard quests serve double duty as tests of faith and loyalty. Those who return successful move closer to earning a valued place at the Leadership Table. Those who do not, have proven their ineptitude or cowardice and are treated accordingly. Those who fail to return at all were clearly never worthy in the first place.

**Rites and Rituals** 
The Endless Serpent does not conduct rituals in the name of a specific deity, as many other faiths do, nor does it celebrate or revere the natural world. Yet ritual is no less important to Seekers than it is to members of other faiths. The difference lies in purpose. Seeker rites are not intended to garner the favor of a deity but must serve a community purpose, and that purpose must be not only worthwhile but vital.

PRAYERS
Followers of the Endless Serpent make little use of prayer. Seekers of certain sects whose worship involves 1 or more named deities often pray to those deities but usually only during rites of greater import. Most Seekers only pray to actualize themselves, often to steel themselves for an upcoming challenge or event. Such "prayers" consist of a quiet or even soundless recitation, the most common being _"The blood is the power, the blood flows in me, the power is mine"._

MINOR RITES
The Endless Serpent as a whole maintains no minor rites as any faith-wide practice is considered a major rite by definition. All localized practices and rituals are therefore considered minor rites, and these vary from cell to cell. Most cells prefer to leave many minor rites to the individual, as the pursuit of the understanding of the self is of paramount importance in the faith, and therefore they keep few if any such rites as a group. Other cells choose to focus on the communal identity of the faith & encourage all local Seekers attendance. These situations are more accurately seen as examples of how the faith uses ritual to build the bonds between members rather than any indicator of the importance of the ritual itself. In these circumstances minor rites can include things such as: 
1. induction of new members
2. celebrating new business ventures
3. community luncheons
4. invitation dinners
5. tea socials
6. garden parties
7. adult learning courses
8. religious retreats
9. guided meditation groups
10. drop-in yoga

MAJOR RITES
The Endless Serpent as a faith does not mark life events as others do (although individual worshipers might). By its very nature it has little interest in what passes for daily life. Weddings are of no significance to most Seekers, however the faith is concerned with matters of life, death, and beyond, so 2 events of daily life hold as much import for Seekers as they do for others: births and deaths.
Unlike other faiths, the Endless Serpent ritually marks the passage of life-giving or life-ending events both within and even outside the ranks of the faithful. It pays close attention to important families and figures regardless of religion. This unusual habit puts Seekers in the strange position of ritually venerating or mourning the birth or death of complete strangers.
On rare occasions, a leader calls the local Seekers together to mark a birth or death of an unknown or otherwise unremarkable individual. This rite happens most often with deaths but can also occur at births from time to time. The order to conduct the rite almost always comes straight from the Balanced Scales, and even local leaders are often mystified as to the significance of the individual so honored. Most never realize their leaders are acting on orders from above.
Beyond this veneration of the twin passages into life and death, the Endless Serpent has 2 "high holidays" that involve substantial ceremony. The Sacrament of Blood is held at irregular intervals throughout the course of the year, and is the cornerstone ritual of the faith entire. The second is held during the 13th "lost" month of Crya.
**The Sacrament of Blood**: This is the most sacred practice in the Endless Serpent. During the Sacrament, all the local Seekers gather in a specially prepared chamber, far from the eyes of prying outsiders. The cult leader begins with a brief chant in Draconic, welcoming the assembly as both individuals and parts of a collective. After the chant the leader moves in turn to each participant, who ritually cuts himself with a sanctified dagger known as a bloodfang. He then allows the Seeker seated next to him to hold his hand while it drips blood into the ritemaster’s ruby chalice. The ritual continues in this manner until every Seeker in attendance has given of his own blood. Unknown to many who partake in the ritual this collected blood is preserved for a wide variety of magical practices.
**Revelations Day (Crya 13th)**: As the year grows colder and finally dies, each Seeker examines whatever spiritual progress they have made that year. Revelations Day -- also called Ascension Day -- offers every member the chance to take back a portion of what he has given throughout the year, and to reflect on the insights so gained. During the ritual the ritemaster convenes the assembled Seekers for a Sacrament of Blood. This time, the ritemaster conducts a ceremony over the filled chalice that cleanses the blood of impurities while concentrating the energies inherent within the precious liquid. Secretly, it is often altered in other mystic ways, depending on the ritemaster’s orders. When this ceremony is complete the ritemaster passes the chalice around with each Seeker drinking from it in turn, taking back no more than he had put in. This ingestion always results in a mind-altering episode whose duration and intensity varies with the individual, and to a lesser extent the amount consumed. These "blood trips" offer faithful souls the chance to visualize the truths that lie within not only their own blood, but within that of their fellow Seekers. Those that are deemed ready for Ascension as dragonborn are granted the first drink before they are ritually reborn as part of the overall rite.

**Trafficking in Blood**
The precious fluid so carefully collected at the Sacraments of Blood would go to waste, had not the church devised a means of preserving and transporting it for later use. The priests and alchemists of the Balanced Scales created the preserving resin, a cheap but effective tool (see below).
**Preserving Resin**: This alchemical additive -- related to oozes -- prevents contamination, fermentation, evaporation, and coagulation. It does not purify already contaminated substances. The Endless Serpent sells this treatment through commercial licensees to various private businesses; it is popular among tea houses, hospitals, and orchards to preserve food and medicines.

EVERYDAY LIFE
Unlike the Sovereign Host or Church of the Unconquered Flame, the Endless Serpent has neither a region where the faith is dominant nor a nation to call its own. Worship is strong in cells all over, particularly in Zir and Droaam, but even where practice of the religion occurs openly, no dominance can be claimed.

PEOPLE of the Endless Serpent
In all but the most degenerate Seeker communities forcible conversion is seen as senseless and worse yet, a waste of time and resources. People too ignorant to see the truth should be left to their own devices. Even when Seekers capture someone outside the faith they almost never give the non-believer the "convert or die" ultimatum. Examples of captured souls asking to join the faith do exist but Seekers demand that individuals come to them. The growth of the spirit is always a personal matter left entirely to the individual, though half-hearted souls might become periphery members in some areas.

GOVERNMENT
Although many Seekers are unaware of it, their faith is one of the most politically active. In its upper echelons, the Endless Serpent is a force for political and social change that uses its congregation as a worldwide masquerade for its true agenda.
The Endless Serpent is involved to some extent in every major government. The faith is best known for its connections to Zir, where it is responsible for, among other things, turning the tide of the Last War and begetting the recently outlawed Order of the Emerald Claw. It's stronger and more influential in Zir than in most other areas. And if the recently converted Shirin d’Deneith succeeds in his bid to take over House Deneith, the tide could turn in favor of the Endless Serpent.
The faith is almost as active in neighboring Aundair, though its presence is not nearly as open or accepted. The capital at Fairhaven is the headquarters of the Cult of Life, the single largest order within the Endless Serpent, which serves as the Aundairian equivalent of the Order of the Emerald Claw (but without a public persona). Operatives have thus far managed to keep a low profile, despite having made substantial inroads in the Aundairian political system.
Seekers are influential in the Lhazaar Principalities which houses one of the most important temples worldwide -- the Widening Gyre in Xandrar.

OTHER FAITHS
Like the Church of the Unconquered Flame, the Endless Serpent believes that all other faiths are wrong. The typical Seeker believes in no divinity beyond that which runs through his own veins, and vehemently decries mindless worship until her last breath. The Endless Serpent holds most other religions in contempt: No sane soul would choose to give up self-determination. Yet every other major religion places the fates of its members in the hands of outside forces: whether gods, angels, demons, or nature itself. Perhaps the only tenet that Seekers share with members of other faiths is that a soul’s actions in life determine its final reward. Where others believe their actions are tallied and judged by those they worship, Seekers hold that an individual’s actions are the only way for the soul to escape the Wheel, for their own sake.
**Unconquered Flame**: Empty-headed zealots of the worst order. The best lesson learned from them is how destructive faith can be when left to others to dictate. The only pure thing about these soulless sheep is the self-righteous condescension they harbor for everyone.
**Sovereign Host**: A faith that could almost be considered quaint, were it not so pervasive. It is a terrible pity that so many are content to eke out miserable lives in the honor of "immortals" who have clearly forsaken them. I leave them to their misery...and to Dolurrh.
**Dark Six**: Vassals of the Six suffer from the same disease of the soul that affects those of the Host, but at least they are more honest about it (followers of the Keeper in particular). If nothing else, they make valuable if untrustworthy allies against the more zealous of the Unconquered Flame.
**Druid Sects**: Some claim that these nature-worshipers are our greatest enemies. In truth, we are more alike than different. We both venerate nature. They look to the natural world beyond us, and in that are misdirected. It is the nature within us all that deserves the greatest reverence.
**Other Faiths**: Simpletons. I can respect power and can understand why some might want to be in league with mighty beings, but to offer one’s soul to such beings -- to lay all hope for divinity at another’s feet -- is beyond pathetic. Even the druids are worthy of more respect.

**Variant Sects**
The Endless Serpent draws Seekers of many differing origins and behaviors. Not all are equally committed or aware of the Balanced Scales. Their spread has grown far beyond the Scale's ability to oversee directly, and they watch with interest as it grows and changes with each new Seeker who comes to the faith.
**Cult of Life**: Despite its benevolent name, this subsect of the Endless Serpent is filled with some of the most dangerous Seekers in the world. Its members are known as "thieves of life," and for good reason: The entire purpose of the cult is the pursuit of immortality, paid for with other living souls. Those at the highest levels of the cult are fully aware of their organization’s leadership and often take orders directly from the Balanced Scales. Neophyte members are kept ignorant of these truths until they have earned their place.
**Hornblade Clan**: This confederation has grown from a small tribe into the single largest community of Seekers in Aundair in the time since the end of the Last War. The clan’s purpose was renewed by the return of an exile by the name of Janilya. After besting the former chieftain in mortal combat, she united the clan under the banner of Blood and made clear her vision for the future: The Hornblades would allow Seekers of other tribes to join, if their belief was strong enough. Since then the clan’s ranks have swelled with new arrivals who come to hear the word of their new prophet and to be a part of her vision of unity.
**Keepers of Blood**: Few cults have caused so large a rift in their parent faiths as have the Keepers. Some Seekers welcome them, others view them as heretics of the worst order. The Keepers of Blood revere both the principles of the cult and the Keeper f the Dark Six. Most cultists do not actually believe in the Keeper as an entity but revere his alleged portfolio. Only by recognizing and revering both primordial aspects can they be assured of divinity or life everlasting. In many ways, they are the most conservative sect of the Endless Serpent.
**Order of the Emerald Claw**: Not so much a sect as a paramilitary branch of the faith, the Order of the Emerald Claw does the will of the Balanced Scales. Agents of the Order operate not only in their home city of Zir but all across the Vast. Some of the rank and file in the Order are unaware of their organization’s ties to the Scales, truly believing themselves to be the ostracized Zir loyalists they portray to the outside world. Those in charge of cells or operations are faithful Seekers, doing work they believe is essential to furthering the Endless Serpent, and they would gladly die before spilling their secrets.
